Men deliberate and dispute variously concerning virtue, whether prudence and justice and the right ordering
				of one's life can be taught. Moreover, we marvel that the
				works of orators, shipmasters, musicians, carpenters, and
				husbandmen are infinite in number, while good men are
				only a name, and are talked of like centaurs, giants, and
				the Cyclops, and that as for any virtuous action that is sincere and unblamable, and manners that are without any
				touch and mixture of bad passions and affections, they are
				not to be found; but if Nature of its own accord should
				produce any thing good and excellent, so many things of
				a foreign nature mix with it (just as wild and impure productions with generous fruit) that the good is scarce discernible. Men learn to sing, dance, and read, and to be
				skilful in husbandry and good horsemanship; they learn
				how to put on their shoes and their garments; they have
				those that teach them how to fill wine, and to dress and
				cook their meat; and none of these things can be done as
				they ought, unless they be instructed how to do them.
				And will ye say, O foolish men! that the skill of ordering
				one's life well (for the sake of which are all the rest) is not
				to be taught, but to come of its own accord, without reason
				and without art?

Why do we, by asserting that virtue is not to be taught,
				make it a thing that does not at all exist? For if by its
				
				 
				
				being learned it is produced, he that hinders its being learned
				destroys it. And now, as Plato says, we never heard that
				because of a blunder in metre in a lyric song, therefore
				one brother made war against another, nor that it put friends
				at variance, nor that cities hereupon were at such enmity
				that they did to one another and suffered one from another
				the extremest injuries. Nor can any one tell us of a sedition raised in a city about the right accenting or pronouncing of a word,—as whether we are to say Τελχῖνας or
				 Τέλχινας ,—nor that a difference arose in a family betwixt
				man and wife about the woof and the warp in cloth. Yet
				none will go about to weave in a loom or to handle a book
				or a harp, unless he has first been taught, though no great
				harm would follow if he did, but only the fear of making
				himself ridiculous (for, as Heraclitus says, it is a piece of
				discretion to conceal one's ignorance); and yet a man without instruction presumes himself able to order a family, a
				wife, or a commonwealth, and to govern very well. Diogenes, seeing a youth devouring his victuals too greedily,
				gave his tutor a box on the ear, and that deservedly, as
				judging it the fault of him that had not taught, not of him
				that had not learned better manners. And what? is it necessary to begin to learn from a boy how to eat and drink handsomely in company, as Aristophanes expresses it,—
				
				
				 
 Not to devour their meat in haste, nor giggle, 
					 Nor awkwardly their feet across to wriggle, 
 
 
				
				and yet are men fit to enter into the fellowship of a family,
				city, married estate, private conversation, or public office,
				and to manage it without blame, without any previous instruction concerning good behavior in conversation? 
 When one asked Aristippus this question, What, are you
					everywhere? he laughed and said, I throw away the fare
					of the waterman, if I am everywhere. And why canst not
					thou also answer, that the salary given to tutors is thrown
					
					 
					
					away and lost, if none are the better for their discipline
					and instruction. But, as nurses shape and form the body
					of a child with their hands, so these masters, when the nurses
					have done with them, first receive them into their charge,
					in order to the forming of their manners and directing their
					steps into the first tracks of virtue. To which purpose the
					Lacedaemonian, that was asked what good he did to the
					child of whom he had the charge, answered well: I make
					good and honest things pleasant to children. These
					masters also teach them to bend down their heads as they
					go along, to touch salt fish with one finger only, but fresh
					fish, bread, and flesh with two; thus to scratch themselves,
					and thus to tuck up their garments.

Now he that says that the art of physic may be
				proper for a tetter or a whitlow, but not to be made use of
				for a pleurisy, a fever, or a frenzy, in what does he differ
				from him that should say that it is fit there should be schools,
				and discourses, and precepts, to teach trifling and childish
				things, but that all skill in greater and more manly things
				comes from use without art and from accidental opportunity? For as he would be ridiculous who should say, that
				one who never learned to row ought not to lay hand on the
				oar, but that he might guide the helm who was never taught
				it; so is he that gives leave for men to be instructed in other
				arts, but not in virtue. He seems to be quite contrary to
				the practice of the Scythians, who, as Herodotus tells us,
				put out their servants' eyes, to prevent them from running
				away; but he puts the eye of reason into these base and
				slavish arts, and plucks it from virtue. But the general
				Iphicrates—when Callias, the son of Chabrias, asked him,
				What art thou? Art thou an archer or a targeteer, a
				trooper or a foot-soldier?—answered well, I am none of
				all these, but one that commands them all. He therefore
				would be ridiculous that should say that the skill of drawing
				
				 
				
				 a bow, of handling arms, of throwing with a sling,
				and of good horsemanship, might indeed be taught, but the
				skill of commanding and leading an army came as it happened, one knew not how. And would not he be still
				more ridiculous who should say that prudence only could
				not be taught, without which all those arts are useless and
				unprofitable? When she is the governess, ranking all
				things in due place and order, every thing is assigned to become useful; for instance, how ungraceful would a feast
				be, though all concerned were skilful and enough practised
				in cookery, in dressing and serving up the meat, and in filling the wine as they ought, if all things were not well
				disposed and ordered among those that waited at the
				table?...