Reason urges us with fresh ideas and fresh zeal
					to attack again our yesterday’s discourse on the
					eating of flesh. It is indeed difficult, as Cato remarked, to talk to bellies which have no ears. And
					the potion of familiarity has been drunk, like that of
					Circe 
					 Commingling pains and pangs, tricks and tears ; 
					nor is it easy to extract the hook of flesh-eating, entangled as it is and embedded in the love of pleasure.
					And, like the Egyptians e who extract the viscera of
					the dead and cut them open in view of the sun, then
					throw them away as being the cause of every single
					sin that the man had committed, it would be well
					for us to excise our own gluttony and lust to kill and
					become pure for the remainder of our lives, since it
					is not so much our belly that drives us to the pollution
					
					 
					
					of slaughter; it is itself polluted by our incontinence.
					Yet if, for heaven’s sake, it is really impossible for us
					to be free from error because we are on such terms
					of familiarity with it, let us at least be ashamed of
					our ill doing and resort to it only in reason. We shall
					eat flesh, but from hunger, not as a luxury. We shall
					kill an animal, but in pity and sorrow, not degrading
					or torturing it - which is the current practice in many
					cases, some thrusting red-hot spits into the throats
					of swine so that by the plunging in of the iron the
					blood may be emulsified and, as it circulates through
					the body, may make the flesh tender and delicate.
					Others jump upon the udders of sows about to give
					birth and kick them so that, when they have blended
					together blood and milk and gore (Zeus the Purifier!)
					and the unborn young have at the same time been
					destroyed at the moment of birth, they may eat the
					most inflamed part of the creature. Still others sew
					up the eyes of cranes and swans, shut them up in
					darkness and fatten them, making the flesh appetizing
					with strange compounds and spicy mixtures.

From these practices it is perfectly evident that
					it is not for nourishment or need or necessity, but
					out of satiety and insolence and luxury that they
					have turned this lawless custom into a pleasure.
					Then, just as with women who are insatiable in
					seeking pleasure, their lust tries everything, goes
					astray, and explores the gamut of profligacy until at
					last it ends in unspeakable practices; so intemperance in eating passes beyond the necessary ends of
					nature and resorts to cruelty and lawlessness to give
					
					 
					
					variety to appetite. For it is in their own company
					that organs of sense are infected and won over and
					become licentious when they do not keep to natural
					standards. Just so the art of hearing has fallen sick,
					corrupting musical taste. From this our luxury and
					debauchery conceives a desire for shameful caresses
					and effeminate titillations. These taught the sight
					not to take pleasure in warlike exercises or gesticulations or refined dances or statues and paintings, but
					to regard the slaughter and death of men, their
					wounds and combats, as the most precious sort of
					spectacle. Just so intemperate intercourse follows
					a lawless meal, inharmonious music follows a shameful debauch, barbarous spectacles follow shameless
					songs and sounds, insensitivity and cruelty toward
					human kind follow savage exhibitions in the theatre.
					It was for this reason that the godlike Lycurgus 
					gave directions in certain rhetrae 
 that the doors and
					roofs of houses should be fashioned by saw and axe
					alone and no other tool should be used-not of course
					because he had a quarrel with gimlets and adzes and
					other instruments for delicate work. It was because
					he knew that through such rough-hewn work you
					will not be introducing a gilded couch, nor will you
					be so rash as to bring silver tables and purple rugs
					and precious stones into a simple house. The corollary
					
					 
					
					of such a house and couch and table and cup is
					a dinner which is unpretentious and a lunch which
					is truly democratic; but all manner of luxury and
					extravagance follow the lead of an evil way of life
					 As new-weaned foal beside his mother runs.

For what sort of dinner is not costly for which
					a living creature loses its life? Do we hold a life
					cheap? I do not yet go so far as to say that it may
					well be the life of your mother or father or some
					friend or child, as Empedocles declared. Yet it does,
					at least, possess some perception, hearing, seeing,
					imagination, intelligence, which last every creature
					receives from Nature to enable it to acquire what is
					proper for it and to evade what is not. Do but consider which are the philosophers who serve the better
					to humanize us: those who bid us eat our children
					and friends and fathers and wives after their death, 
					or Pythagoras and Empedocles who try to accustom
					us to act justly toward other creatures also? You
					ridicule a man who abstains from eating mutton.
					But are we, they will say, to refrain from laughter
					when we see you slicing off portions from a dead
					father or mother and sending them to absent friends
					and inviting those who are at hand, heaping their
					
					 
					
					
					plates with flesh? But as it is, perhaps we commit
					a sin when we touch these books of theirs without
					cleansing our hands and faces, our feet and ears - 
					unless, by Heaven, it is a purification of those members to speak on such a subject as this, washing, 
					as Plato says, the brine from one’s ears with the
						fresh water of discourse. If one should compare
					these two sets of books and doctrines, the former
					may serve as philosophy for the Scyths and Sogdians
					and the Black Cloaks, whose story as told by Herodotus gains no credit ; but the precepts of
					Pythagoras and Empedocles were the laws for the
					ancient Greeks, along with their diet of wheat... 
					[Because there is no question of justice between us
					and the irrational animals.]

Who, then, were they who later decreed this?
					 
 The first to forge the highway’s murderous sword,
					 
 And first to eat the flesh of ploughing ox. 
 
 
					This is the way, you may be sure, in which tyrants
					begin their course of bloody slaughters. Just as, for
					instance, at Athens they put to death initially the
					worst of the sycophants, and likewise in the second
					and third instances; but next, having become accustomed to bloodshed they allowed Niceratus, the
					
					 
					
					son of Nicias, to be killed and the general Theramenes and the philosopher Polemarchus. Just so,
					at the beginning it was some wild and harmful
					animal that was eaten, then a bird or fish that had
					its flesh torn. And so when our murderous instincts
					had tasted blood and grew practised on wild animals,
					they advanced to the labouring ox and the well-behaved sheep and the house-warding cock; thus,
					little by little giving a hard edge to our insatiable
					appetite, we have advanced to wars and the slaughter
					and murder of human beings. Yet if someone once
					demonstrates that souls in their rebirths make use of
					common bodies and that what is now rational reverts
					to the irrational, and again what is now wild becomes
					tame, and that Nature changes everything and
					assigns new dwellings
					 Clothing souls with unfamiliar coat of flesh ; 
					will not this deter the unruly element in those who
					have adopted the doctrine from implanting disease
					and indigestion in our bodies and perverting our
					souls to an ever more cruel lawlessness, as soon as
					we are broken of the habit of not entertaining a
					guest or celebrating a marriage or consorting with
					our friends without bloodshed and murder?

Yet even if the argument of the migration of
					souls from body to body is not demonstrated to the
					point of complete belief, there is enough doubt to
					make us quite cautious and fearful. It is as though
					in a clash of armies by night you had drawn your
					sword and were rushing at a man whose fallen body
					was hidden by his armour and should hear someone
					remarking that he wasn’t quite sure, but that he
					thought and believed that the prostrate figure was
					that of your son or brother or father or tent-mate - 
					which would be the better course: to approve a
					false suspicion and spare your enemy as a friend, or
					to disregard an uncertain authority and kill your
					friend as a foe? The latter course you will declare
					to be shocking. Consider also Merope in the play
					raising her axe against her son himself because she
					believes him to be that son’s murderer and saying
					 This blow I give you is more costly yet - 
					what a stir she rouses in the theatre as she brings
					them to their feet in terror lest she wound the youth
					before the old man can stop her! Now suppose one
					old man stood beside her saying, Hit him! He’s
						your enemy, and another who said, Don’t strike!
							He is your son : which would be the greater misdeed, to omit the punishment of an enemy because
					of the son, or to slay a child under the impulse of
					
					 
					
					anger against an enemy? In a ease, then, where it
					is not hate or anger or self-defence or fear for ourselves that induces us to murder, but the motive of
					pleasure, and the victim stands there under our power
					with its head bent back and one of our philosophers
					says, Kill it! It’s only a brute beast ; but the
					other says, Stop! What if the soul of some relative
						or friend has found its way into this body? - Good
					God! Of course the risk is equal or much the same
					in the two cases - if I refuse to eat flesh, or if I,
					disbelieving, kill my child or some other relative!

There remains yet another contention with the
					Stoics about flesh-eating, and this is not equal, 
					either. For what is this great tension 
 on the
					belly and the kitchen? Why, when they count
					pleasure effeminate and denounce it as being neither
					a good nor an advanced principle 
 nor commensurate with Nature, 
 are they so concerned with
					these pleasures? It would certainly be consistent for
					them, since they banish perfume and cakes from their
					banquets, to be more squeamish about blood and flesh.
					But as it is, confining as it were their philosophy to
					their ledgers, they economize on their dinners in
					trivial and needless details while they do not deprecate this inhuman and murderous item of expense.
					 Of course, they say, we human beings have no
						compact of justice with irrational animals. 
 Nor,
					one might reply, have you with perfume or exotic
					sweetmeats either. Refrain from animals also, if you
					
					 
					
					
					are expelling the useless and unnecessary element in
					pleasure from all its lurking-places.

Let us, however, now examine the point
					whether we really have no compact of justice with
					animals; and let us do so in no artificial or sophistical
					manner, but fixing our attention on our own emotions
					and conversing like human beings with ourselves and
					weighing...