TYCHIADES 
Why in the world is it, Simon, that while other
men, both slave and free, each know some art by
which they are of use to themselves and to someone
else, you apparently have no work which would
enable you to make any profit yourself or give away
anything to anybody else?
 
 SIMON 
What do you mean by that question, Tychiades ?
I do not understand. Try to put it more clearly.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Is there any art that you happen to know?
Music, for instance? °
 
 SIMON 
No, indeed.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Well, medicine ?
 
 SIMON 
Not that, either.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Geometry, then?
 
 SIMON 
Not by any means.

 


Well, rhetoric? For as to philosophy, you are as
remote from that as vice itself is!
 
 SIMON 
Indeed, even more so, if possible. So don’t suppose you have touched me with that taunt, as if I did
not know it. I admit that I am vicious, and worse
than you think!
 
 TYCHIADES 
Quite so. Well, it may be that although you have
not learned those arts because of their magnitude and
difficulty, you have learned one of the vulgar arts
like carpentry or shoemaking; you are not so well
off in every way as not to need even such an art.
 
 SIMON 
You are right, Tychiades ; but I am not acquainted
with any of these either.
 
 TYCHIADES 
What other art, then?
 
 SIMON 
What other? A fine one, I think. If you knew
about it, I believe you would speak highly of it too.
In practice, I claim to be successful at it already,
but whether you will find me so in theory also I
can't say.
 
 TYCHIADES 
What is it?
 
 SIMON 
I do not feel that I have yet thoroughly mastered
the literature on that subject. So for the present

 

you may know that I possess an art and need not be
dissatisfied with me on that score ; some other day
you shall hear what art it is.
 
 TYCHIADES 
But I can’t wait.
 
 SIMON 
The nature of the art will perhaps seem extraordinary when you hear it.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Tr aly, that is just why I am keen to know about it.
 
 SIMON 
‘Some other day, Tychiades.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Oh, no! Tell me now—unless you are ashamed !
 
 SIMON 
Parasitic.

TYCHIADES 
Really, would anyone who was not insane call that
an art, Simon?
 
 SIMON 
I do; and if you think I am insane, think also
that my insanity is the reason for my not knowing any other art and acquit me of your charges at
once. They say, you know, that this malign spirit,
cruel in all else to those whom she inhabits, at least
secures them remission of their sins, like a schoolmaster or a tutor, by taking the blame for them upon
herself. ~
 
 TYCHIADES 
Well then, Simon, Parasitic is an art ?

 

 SIMON 
Indeed it is, and I am a craftsman in it. 
 TYCHIADES 
Then you are a parasite ?
 
 SIMON 
That was a cruel thrust, Tychiades !
 
 TYCHIADES 
But do not you blush to call yourself a parasite ?
 
 SIMON 
Not at all; I should be ashamed not to speak it out.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Then, by Zeus, when we wish to tell about you to
someone who does not know you, when he wants to
find out about you, of course we shall be correct in
referring to you as “the parasite”?
 
 SIMON 
Far more correct in referring to me so than in
referring to Phidias as a sculptor, for I take quite as
much joy in my art as Phidias did in his Zeus.
 
 TYCHIADES 
I say, here is a point; as I think of it, a gale of
laughter has come over me!
 
 SIMON 
What is it?
 
 TYCHIADES 
What if we should address you in due form at the
top of our letters as “Simon the Parasite”!


 


 SIMON 
Why, you would do me greater pleasure than
you would Dion by addressing him as “the Philosopher.”

TYCHIADES 
Well, how it pleases you to be styled matters little
or nothing to me; but you must consider the general
absurdity of it.
 
 SIMON 
What absurdity, I should like to know?
 
 TYCHIADES 
If we are to list this among the other arts, so that
when anybody enquires what art it is, we shall say
“Parasitic,” to correspond with Music and Rhetoric. 
 SIMON 
For my part, Tychiades, I should call this an art
far more than any other. If you care to listen, I
think I can tell you why, although, as I just said, I
am not entirely prepared for it.
TYCHIADES It will make no difference at all if you say little,
as long as that little is true.
 
 SIMON 
Come now, first of all, if it please you, let us consider what an art is in general; for in that way we
can go on to the individual] arts and see if they truly
come under that head.



 

 TYCHIADES 
What on earth is an art, then? Surely you know.
 
 SIMON 
To be sure.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Then do not hesitate to tell, if you do know.

SIMON 
An art, I remember to have heard a learned man
say, is a complex of knowledges exercised in combination to some end useful to the world.
 
 TYCHIADES 
He was quite right in what he said, and you in
your recollection of it.
 
 SIMON 
If Parasitic satisfies this definition completely, what
other conclusion could there be than that it is an art?
 
 TYCHIADES 
It would be an art, of course, if it should really be
like that.
 
 SIMON 
Now then, let us apply to Parasitic the individual
characteristics of an art and see whether it is in
harmony with them or whether its theory, like a
good-for-nothing pot when you try its ring, sounds
cracked. Every art, then, must be a complex of



 

knowledges ; and of these, in the case of the para
site, first of all there is testing and deciding who
would be suitable to support him, and whom he could
begin to cultivate without being sorry for it later.
Or do we care to maintain that assayers possess an
art because they know how to distinguish between
coins that are counterfeit and those that are not, but
parasites discriminate without art between men that
are counterfeit and those that are good, even though
men are not distinguishable at once, like coins?
Wise Euripides criticizes this very point when he
Says:

 
 
 In men, no mark whereby to tell the knave 
 Did ever yet upon his body grow. 
 
 Euripides, Medea518. 
 

This makes the parasite’s art even greater, since it is
better than divination at distinguishing and recognising things so obscure and hidden.

As for knowing how to talk appropriately and to
act in such a way as to become intimate and show
himself extremely devoted to his patron, do not
you think that this shows intelligence and highlydeveloped knowledge?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Yes, indeed.
 
 SIMON 
And at banquets, to go away with more than anybody else, enjoying greater favour than those who do
not possess the same art—-do you think that can
be managed without some degree of theory and
wisdom ?

 

 TYCHIADES 
Not by any means.
 
 SIMON 
What about knowing the merits and defects of
bake-stuffs and made dishes? Does that seem to you
matter for an untrained man’s bumptious inquisitiveness? Yet excellent Plato says:

 
 
 When a man is
about to partake of a banquet, if he be not versed
in the art of cookery, his opinion of the feast in
preparation is something deficient in weight.
 
 Plato, Theaetetus178D.

That Parasitic is based not only on knowledge,
but on exercised knowledge, you may readily assure
yourself from this fact: the knowledges that belong
to the other arts often remain unexercised for days
and nights and months and years, and yet the arts
are not lost to those who possess them ; but if the .
parasite’s knowledge is not in exercise daily, not
only the art, I take it, but the artist himself, is lost
thereby !

And as to its being “directed to some end. useful
to the world,” it would be crazy, don’t you think,
to investigate that point. I, for my part, cannot
discover that anything in the world is more useful
than eating and drinking, and in fact without them
it is impossible to live at all !
 
 TYCHIADES 
Quite so.

SIMON 
Again, Parasitic is not the same sort of thing as
beauty and strength, so as to be considered a gift,.
like them, rather than an art. 



 

 TYCHIADES 
You are right.
 
 SIMON 
But on the other hand, it is not want of art; for
want of art never achieves anything for its possessor. 
For example, if you should put yourself in command
of a ship at sea in a storm without knowing how to
steer, should you come safely through ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Not by any means.
 
 SIMON 
How about a man who should take horses in hand
without knowing how to drive?
 
 TYCHIADES 
He would not come through, either.
 
 SIMON 
Why, pray, except because he does not possess the
art by which he would be able to save himself?
 
 TYCHIADES 
To be sure.
 
 SIMON 
Then the parasite would not be saved by Parasitic
if it were want of art?
TY CHIADES
True.
 
 SIMON 
Then it is art that saves him, and not want of art ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Quite so.


 

 SIMON 
Then Parasitic is an art ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
It is, apparently.
 
 SIMON 
I assure you I know of many instances when good
helmsmen have been wrecked and expert drivers
thrown from their seats, and some had _ broken
bones, while others were completely done for; but
nobody can cite any such mishap in the case of a
parasite.
Then if Parasitic is not want of art and not a
gift, but a complex of knowledges exercised in combination, evidently we have reached an agreement
to-day that it is an art.

TYCHIADES 
As far as I can judge from what has been said.
But wait a bit: give us a first-class definition of
Parasitic.
 
 SIMON 
Right. It seems to me that the definition might
best be expressed’ thus: Parasitic is that art which
is concerned with food and drink and what must be
said and done to obtain them, and its end is pleasure.
 
 TYCHIADES 
That, to my mind, is a tip-top definition of your
art; but look out that you do not get into conflict
with some of the philosophers over the end. 


 

 SIMON 
It will be quite sufficient if I can show that happiness and Parasitic have the same end, and that
will be plain from this:

wise Homer, admiring the
life of a parasite on the ground that it alone is blessed
and enviable, says:
 
 
 I for my own part hold that there is no end more delightful 
 Than when cheerfulness reigneth supreme over all of the people ; 
 Banqueters down the long halls give ear to the bard as he singeth, 
 Sitting in regular order, and by each man is a table 
 Laden with bread and with meat; while the server from out of the great bowl 
 Dippeth the mead, and beareth and poureth it into the beakers. 
 Odyssey9, 5 ff. 
 


And as if this were not enough to express his
admiration, he makes his own opinion more evident,
rightly saying :—
 
 
 This is a thing that to me in my heart doth seem very goodly. 
 
 Odyssey9, 11. 
 


From what he says, he counts nothing else happy
but to be a parasite. And it was no ordinary man
to whom he ascribed these words, but the wisest of
them all. After all, if Odysseus had wished to commend the Stoic end, he could have said so when
he brought Philoctetes back from Lemnos, when he
sacked Troy, when he checked the Greeks in their
flight, when he entered Troy after flogging himself
and putting on wretched Stoic rags; but on those


 

occasions he did not call that a more delightful end !
Moreover, after he had entered into the Epicurean
life once more in Calypso’s isle, when he had it in
his power to live in idleness and luxury, to dally
with the daughter of Atlas, and to enjoy every
pleasurable emotion, even then he did not call that
end more delightful, but the life of a parasite, who
at that time was called a banqueter. What does he
say, then? It is worth while to cite his verses once
more, for there is nothing like hearing them said over
and over: “banqueters sitting in regular order,” and:

 
 by each man is a table 
 Laden with bread and with meat.

As to Epicurus, quite shamelessly filching the end
of Parasitic, he makes it the end of his conception
of happiness. That the thing is plagiarism, and that
pleasure does not concern Epicurus at all, but does
concern the parasite, you can assure yourself from
this line of reasoning. I for'my part consider that
pleasure is first of all the freedom of the flesh from
discomfort, and secondly, not having the spirit full
of turbulence and commotion. Now then, each of
these things is attained by the parasite, but neither
by Epicurus. For with his inquiries about the shape
of the earth, the infinitude of the universe, the magnitude of the sun, distances in space, primal elements,
and whether the gods exist or not, and with his continual strife and bickering with certain persons about
the end itself, he is involved not only in the troubles

 

of man but in those of the universe. The parasite,
however, thinking that everything is all right and
thoroughly convinced it would not be any better if
it were other than as it is, eats and sleeps in great
peace and comfort, with nothing of that sort annoying him, flat on his back, with his arms and legs
flung out, like Odysseus sailing home from Scheria.

Again, it is not only in this way that pleasure
is foreign to Kpicurus, but in another way. This
Epicurus, whoever the learned gentleman is, either
has or has not his daily bread. Now if he has not,
it is not a question of living a life of pleasure; he
will not even live! But if he has, he gets it either
from his own larder or that of someone else. Now
if he gets his daily bread from someone else, he is a
parasite and not what he calls himself; but if he
gets it from his own larder, he will not lead a life of
pleasure.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Why not?
 
 SIMON 
If he gets his daily bread from his own larder,
many are the unpleasantnesses which must needs
attend such a life, Tychiades! Just see how many!
A man who intends to shape his life by pleasure
should satisfy all the desires that arise in him. What
do you say to that?
 
 TYCHIADES 
I agree with you.
 
 SIMON 
Therefore the man of vast means no doubt has
the opportunity of doing so, while the man of
little or no means has not; consequently a poor


 

man cannot become an adept or attain the end, that
is to say, pleasure. Even the rich man, however, .
who through his wealth ministers lavishly to his ©
desires, cannot attain that. Why? Because quite
inevitably, when a man spends his money, he becomes
involved in many an unpleasantness, at one moment
quarrelling with his cook for preparing the meat
badly—or else if he does not quarrel, eating poor
food on that account and coming short of his
pleasure—and the next moment quarrelling with
the man who manages his household affairs, if he
does not manage them well. Is not that so?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Yes, by Zeus, I agree with you.
 
 SIMON 
Now Epicurus is likely to have all this happen to
him, so that he will never reach the end. But the
parasite has no cook with whom to lose his temper,
nor lands nor house nor money over the loss of
which to be vexed, so that he alone can eat and
drink without being annoyed by any of the matters
which inevitably annoy the rich.

That Parasitic is an art has been well enough
demonstrated by means of this argument and the
others. It remains to show that it is the best art,
and not simply this, but first that it excels all the
other arts put together, and then that it excels each
of them individually. 

 
It excels all put together for this reason. Every
art has to be prefaced by study, hardships, fear and

 

floggings, from which everyone would pray to be
delivered. But this art alone, it seems, can be
learned without hardships. Who ever went home
from a dinner in tears, as we see.some going home
from their schools? Who ever set out for a dinner
looking gloomy, like those who go to school? I
promise you, the parasite goes to dinner of his own
accord, with a right good will to exercise his art,
while those who are learning the other arts hate
them so much that some run away from home on
account of them ! 

 
Again, should you not note that when pupils make
progress in those arts, their fathers and mothers give
them as special rewards what they give the parasite
every day? ‘“By Zeus, the boy has written nicely,”
they say; “give him something to eat!”’ “He has
not written correctly; don’t give him anything!”
So highly is the thing esteemed, both as a reward
and by way of punishment.

Again, the other arts attain to this end late,
reaping their harvest of pleasure only after their
apprenticeship; for “the road to them leadeth
uphill’ and is long. Parasitic alone of them all
derives profit from the art immediately, in the
apprenticeship itself, and no sooner does it begin
than it is at its end. 

 
Moreover, the other arts, not merely in certain
cases but in every case, have come into existence to
provide support and nothing else, while the parasite
has his support immediately, as soon as he enters
upon his art. Do not you see that while the farmer


 

does not farm for the sake of farming, nor the builder
build for the sake of building, the parasite does not
aim at something different; his work and its object
are one and the same thing.

Everybody knows, too, that those who ply the rest
of the arts drudge all the time except one or two
days a month which they celebrate as holidays, and
are said to have their good time then. But the
parasite celebrates thirty holidays a month, for he
thinks that every day belongs to the gods.

Furthermore, those who wish to be successful in
the other arts eat little and drink little, like invalids, and it is impossible to learn them while one
is rejoicing the inner man with plenty of food and
plenty of wine.

The other arts, moreover, cannot be of use to their
possessor without tools, for it is impossible to pipe
without a pipe or to strum without a lyre or to ride
without a horse ; but this one is so genial and presents so little difficulty to the artisan that even one
who has no tools can follow it.

And we pay, it is likely, for our lessons in the
other arts, but get paid in this one.

Besides, the
other arts have teachers, but Parasitic has none;
like the Art of Poetry according to the definition
of Socrates, it comes by some divine dispensation.

Reflect, too, that we cannot exercise the other arts



 

while on a journey or a voyage, but this one can
be plied both on the road and at sea.

TYCHIADES 
Quite true.
 
 SIMON 
Moreover, Tychiades, it seems to me that the other
arts stand in need of this one, but this one does not
stand in need of any other. 
 TYCHIADES 
But, I say, don’t you think that people who take
what belongs to someone else do wrong ?
 
 SIMON 
Certainly.
 
 TYCHIADES 
How is it, then, that the parasite is the only one
that does not do wrong in taking what belongs to
someone else?

SIMON 
I can’t say ! — Again, in the other arts the first
steps are shabby and insignificant, but in Parasitic
the first step is a very fine one, for friendship, that
oft-lauded word, is nothing else, you will find, than
the first step in Parasitic.
 
 TYCHIADES 
What do you mean?
 
 SIMON 
That nobody invites an enemy or an unknown
person to dinner; not even a slight acquaintance. A



 

man must first, I take it, become a friend in order to
share another's bow] and board, and the mystic rites
of this art. Anyhow, I have often heard people say :
“How much of a friend is he, when he has neither
eaten nor drunk with us?”’ That is of course because they think that only one who has shared their
meat and drink is a trusty friend.

That in truth it is the most royal of the arts, you
can infer from this fact above all: men work at the
rest of them not only with discomfort and sweat
but actually sitting or standing, just as if they were
slaves to the arts, while the parasite plies his art
lying down, like a king!

What need is there, in speaking of his felicity, to
mention that he alone, according to wise Homer,
“neither planteth a plant with his hands nor
plougheth, but all, without sowing or ploughing,” 
supply him with pasture?

Again, there is nothing to hinder a rhetorician or
a geometer or a blacksmith from working at his
trade whether he is a knave or a fool, but nobody
can be a parasite who is either a knave or a fool.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Goodness! What a fine thing you make out
Parasitic to be! I myself already want to be a
parasite, I think, rather than what I am.

SIMON 
Well, that it excels all put together, I think I


 

have demonstrated. Come now, let us see how it
excels each individually. To compare it with the
vulgar arts is silly, and, in a way, more appropriate
to someone who is trying to belittle its dignity. We
must prove that it excels the finest and greatest
of them. It is universally admitted that rhetoric and
philosophy, which some people even make out to be
sciences because of their nobility, are the greatest.
Therefore, if I should prove that Parasitic is far
superior to these, obviously it will appear preeminent
among the other arts, like Nausicaa among her
handmaidens.

It excels both rhetoric and philosophy, in the first
place in its objective reality ; for it has this, and they
have not. We do not hold one and the same view
about rhetoric; some of us call it an art, some a
want of art, others a depraved art, and others something else. So too with philosophy, which is not
uniform and consistent ; for Epicurus has on opinion
about things, the Stoics another, the Academics
another, the Peripatetics another; in brief, everybody claims that philosophy is something different,
and up to now, at all events, it cannot be said either
that the same men control opinion or that their art
is one. By this it is clear what conclusion remains to
be drawn. I maintain that there can be no art at all
which has not objective reality. For how else can you


 

explain it that arithmetic is one and the same, and
twice two is four not only here but in Persia, and
all its doctrines are in tune not only in Greece but
in strange lands, yet we see many different philosophies, all of them out of tune both in their beginnings and in their ends ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
You are right: they say philosophy is one, but
they themselves make it many.

SIMON 
As far as the other arts are concerned, if there
should be some discord in them, one might pass it
over, thinking it excusable, since they are subordinate and their knowledges are not exempt from
change. But who could endure that philosophy
should not be one, and in better tune with itself
than a musical instrument? Well now, philosophy
is not one, for I see that it is infinitely many; yet
it cannot be many, for wisdom is one.

The same can be said, too, of the objective reality
of rhetoric. When all do not express the same views
about one subject, but there is a battle royal of contradictory declarations, that is the greatest proot
that the subject of which there is not a single definite conception does not exist at all ; for to enquire
whether it is this rather than that, and never to agree

 

that it is one, does away with the very existence of
the subject that is questioned.

This is not the case, however, with Parasitic.
Both among Greeks and among foreigners it is one
and uniform and consistent, and nobody can say that
it is practised in one way by this set of men and in
another by that set. Nor are there, it seems, among
parasites any sects like the Stoics or the Epicureans,
holding different doctrines; no, there is concord
among them all, and agreement in their works and
in their end. So to my thinking Parasitic may well
be, in this respect at least, actually wisdom.

TYCHIADES 
It seems to me that you have put al] this very well.
But how do you prove that philosophy is inferior to
your art in other ways?
 
 SIMON 
Well, it must first be mentioned that no parasite
ever fell in love with philosophy ; but it is on record
that philosophersin great number have been fond of
Parasitic, and even to-day they love it!
 
 TYCHIADES 
Why, what philosophers can you mention that
have been eager to play parasite ?
 
 SIMON 
What philosophers, Tychiades? Though you know
them yourself, you pretend not to, and try to pull

 

the wool over my eyes, as if it brought them
disgrace instead of honour !
 
 TYCHIADES 
No, by Zeus, Simon ; I am very much at a loss as
to whom you can find to mention.
 
 SIMON 
My dear fellow, you seem to be unfamiliar with
their biographers, as otherwise you would certainly
be able to recognize whom I mean.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Well, anyhow, by Heracles, I long to find out now
who they are.
 
 SIMON 
I shall give you a list of them, and they are not
the riff-raff, but in my opinion the best, and those
whom you would least expect.

Aeschines the
Socratic, the man who wrote the long and witty
dialogues, once went to Sicily, taking them with
him, in the hope that through them he might be
able to get acquainted with Dionysius the tyrant;
and after he had read his “Miltiades”’ and was
considered to have made a hit, he made himself at
home in Sicily from then on, playing parasite to the
tyrant and bidding adieu to the haunts of Socrates.

And what about Aristippus of Cyrene? Is he not
in your opinion one of the philosophers of distinction ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Very much so.
 
 SIMON 
But he too lived in Syracuse at about the same
time, playing parasite to Dionysius. In fact, of all

 

the parasites he was in highest favour with him, —
being, to be sure, somewhat more gifted for the art
than the rest of them, so that Dionysius sent his
cooks to him every day, to learn something from
him. 

 
Aristippus, indeed, appears to have been a worthy
ornament to the art ;

but your most noble Plato also
came to Sicily for this purpose, and after being
parasite to the tyrant only a few days, was turned
out of his place as parasite on account of ineptitude.
Then, after going back to Athens and working hard
and preparing himself, he cruised once more to
Sicily on a second venture, and again, after only a —
few days of dining, was turned out on account of
stupidity ; and this “Sicilian disaster” of Plato’s is
considered equal to that of Nicias.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Why, who tells about this, Simon ?

SIMON 
A great many; among them, Aristoxenus the
musician, who deserves great consideration. 
That Euripides was parasite to Archelaus until he
died, and Anaxarchus to Alexander, you surely
know.

As to Aristotle, he only made a beginning
in Parasitic, as in every other art.

I have shown that, as I said, philosophers have
been eager to play parasite; but nobody can
instance a parasite who has cared to practise philosophy.

Furthermore, if happiness lies in not hungering
or thirsting or shivering, nobody has this in his
power except the parasite. Consequently you can
find many cold and hungry philosophers, but never
a parasite; otherwise he would not be a parasite,
but an unfortunate beggar fellow, resembling a
philosopher.

TYCHIADES 
You have been sufficiently explicit on that score.
But how do you prove that Parasitic excels
philosophy and rhetoric in other respects ?
 
 SIMON 
There are seasons, my dear fellow, in the life of
man, seasons of peace, I take it, and again seasons
of war. Well, in those seasons it is absolutely inevitable that the arts and those who possess them
should show what they are. First, if you please, let
us consider the season of war, and what class of men
would be above all most useful to themselves individually and to the state in general.

 
 TYCHIADES 
What a searching test of manhood you are
announcing! I have long been laughing inwardly
to think how a philosopher would look in comparison
with a parasite.

SIMON 
Then in order to prevent you from wondering too
much and also from thinking it a laughing matter,
let us imagine that right here in our city
proclamation has been made that the enemy has
unexpectedly invaded the country; that it is

 

necessary to take the field against them and not
allow the farm-lands outside the walls to be laid
waste, that the commander has called to the colours
all those of military age, and that of course
everybody is going, including certain philosophers
and rhetoricians and parasites. First, then, let us
strip them to the skin; for those who are going to
put on armour must first take off their clothes.
Now inspect your men, sir, one by one, and give
them a physical examination. Some of them you
can see to be thin and pale through privation, shuddering, and as limp as if they had already been
wounded. Surely it would be ridiculous to say that
fighting, hand-to-hand combat, pushing, dust, and.
wounds can be borne by men like these, who need
something to brace them up!

Pass on, and now see
how the parasite looks! In the first place, is he not
generous in his proportions and pleasing in his
complexion, neither dark nor fair of skin; for the
one befits a woman, and the other a slave; and
besides, has he not a spirited look, with a fiery
glance like mine, high and bloodshot? It is not
becoming, you know, to go into battle with a
timorous and womanish eye. Would not such a man
make a fine soldier in life and a fine corpse if he
should die ?

But what is the good of guessing about all this,
when we have historical examples? To put it
briefly, in war, of all the rhetoricians and_philosophers that ever were, some have not dared to go
outside the walls at all, and if any one of them ever
took the field under compulsion, he deserted his
post, I maintain, and beat a retreat.


 

 TYCHIADES 
What assertions, all surprising and none moderate !
But say your say, nevertheless.
 
 SIMON 
Among the followers of rhetoric, Isocrates not only
never went to war but never even went to court,
through cowardice, I assume, as that is why he could
not even keep his voice. And did not Demades
and Aeschines and Philocrates, through fright,
directly upon the declaration of war against Philip,
betray their city and themselves to Philip and
continually direct public affairs at Athens in the
interest of that man, who was waging war upon the
Athenians at that time, if ever a man was; and
he was their friend. Moreover, Hyperides and
Demosthenes and Lycurgus, who put up a more
courageous front and were always making an uproar
and abusing Philip in the assemblies—what on earth
did they do that was valiant in the war with him?
Hyperides and Lycurgus did not even take the
field—why, they did not even dare to show their
heads just outside the gates, but safe within the
walls, they sat at home as if the city were already
besieged, framing trivial motions and petty resolutions! And as for the topmost of them, the
man who was continually talking in the assembly
about “Philip, the scoundrel from Macedon, where
one could never even buy a decent slave!” he did



 

venture to join the advance into Boeotia, but before
the armies joined battle and began to fight at close
quarters he threw away his shield and fled! Has
nobody ever told you that before? It is very well
known, not only to the Athenians, but to the people
of Thrace and Scythia, where that vagabond came
from.

TYCHIADES 
I know all that. They were orators, however, who
cultivated speech-making, not virtue. What have
you to say about the philosophers? Surely you are
not able to censure them as you did the others.
 
 SIMON 
They in turn, Tychiades, though they talk every
day about courage and wear the word virtue smooth,
will be found far more cowardly and effeminate than
the orators. Look at it from this standpoint. Inthe
first place, there is nobody that can mention a
philosopher who died in battle ; either they did not
enter the service at all, or if they did, every one of
them ran away. Antisthenes, Diogenes, Crates, Zeno,
Plato, Aeschines, Aristotle, and all that motley array
never even saw a line of battle. The only one who
had the courage to go out for the battle at Delium,
their wise Socrates, fled the field, fleeing for cover all
the way from Parnes to the gymnasium of Taureas. 




 

He thought it far nicer to sit and philander with
boys and propound petty sophistries to anyone who
should come along than to fight with a Spartan
soldier.
 
 TYCHIADES 
My excellent friend, I have already heard this
from others, who certainly did not wish to ridicule
or libel them; so I do not in the least think that
you are belying them out of partiality to your own
art.

But if you are now willing, tell what the
parasite is like in war, and whether anybody at all
among the ancient heroes is said to have been a
parasite. 
 SIMON 
Why, my dear friend, no one is so unfamiliar with
Homer, even if he is completely unlettered, as not to
know that in him the noblest of the heroes are
parasites! The famous Nestor, from whose tongue
speech flowed like honey, was parasite to the king’
himself; and neither Achilles, who seemed and was
the finest in physique, nor Diomed nor Ajax was so
lauded and admired by Agamemnon as Nestor. He
does not pray to have ten of Ajax or ten of Achilles,
but says that he would long ago have taken Troy if
he had had ten soldiers like that parasite, old as he
was. Idomeneus, too, the son of Zeus, is similarly
spoken of as parasite to Agamemnon.

TYCHIADES 
Of course I myself know all this, but I do not
think that I yet see how the two men were parasites
to Agamemnon.
 
 SIMON 
Remember, my friend, those lines that Agamemnon
himself addresses to Idomeneus.
 
 TYCHIADES 
What lines?
 
 SIMON 

 
 
 Your beaker has always 
 Stood full, even as mine, to be drunk when the spirit should move you. 
 
 Iliad4, 262-263. 
 

For in saying there that the beaker “always stood
full,’ he did not mean that Idomeneus’ cup stood full
under all circumstances, even when he fought or
when he slept, but that he alone was privileged to
eat with the king all the days of his life, unlike
the rest of the soldiers, who were invited only on
certain days.
As for Ajax, when he had fought gloriously in
single combat with Hector,
 
 
 they brought him to
great Agamemnon, 
 
 Iliad7, 312. 
 

Homer says, and by way of
special honour, he was at last counted worthy of
sharing the king’s table. But Idomeneus and Nestor
dined with the king daily, as he himself says.
Nestor, indeed, in my opinion was the most workmanlike and efficient parasite among the kings; he
began the art, not in the time of Agamemnon, but
away back in the time of Caeneus and Exadius, 


 

and by all appearances would never have stopped
practising it if Agamemnon had not been killed.
 
 TYCHIADES 
He was a doughty parasite, I grant you. Try to
name some more, if you know of any.

SIMON 
What, Tychiades, was not Patroclus parasite to
Achilles, and that too although he was quite as fine
a young man, both in spirit and in physique, as any
of the other Greeks? For my part I think I am
right in concluding from his deeds that he was not
even inferior to Achilles himself. When Hector
broached the gates and was fighting within them
beside the ships, it was he that thrust him out and
extinguished the ship of Protesilaus, which was
already in flames. Yet the fighters who manned
that ship were not the most cowardly of all: they
were the sons of Telamon, Ajax and Teucer, one of
whom was a good spearman, the other a good archer.
And he slew many of the barbarians, among them
Sarpedon, the son of Zeus, this parasite of Achilles!
In his death too, he was not to be compared with the
others. Achilles slew Hector, man to man, and Paris ©
slew Achilles himself, but it needed a god and two
men to slay the parasite. And in dying, the words
that he uttered were not like those of noble Hector,
who humbled himself before Achilles and besought
that his body be given back to his family ; no, they


 

were the sort of words that a parasite would naturally
utter. What were they, do you ask?

 
 
 Even if twenty such men had come in my way in the battle, 
 All would have met their death, laid low by my spear on the instant. 
 
 Iliad16, 8

TYCHIADES 
Enough said as to that; but try to show that
Patroclus was not the friend but ‘the parasite of
Achilles.
 
 SIMON 
I shall cite you Patroclus himself, Tychiades,
saying that he was a parasite.
 
 TYCHIADES 
That is a surprising statement.
 
 SIMON 
Listen then to the lines themselves:

 
 
 Let my bones not lie at a distance from thine, O Achilles : 
 Let them be close to your side, as I lived in the house of our kindred. 
 
 Iliad23, 83. 
 


And again, farther on, he says: “And now Peleus
took me in and

 
 
 Kept me with kindliest care, and gave me the name of thy servant. 
 
 Iliad23, 89. 
 

That is, he maintained him as a parasite. If he
had wanted to call Patroclus a friend, he would not
have given him the name of servant, for Patroclus
was a freeman. Whom, then, does he mean by




 

servants, if not either friends or slaves? Parasites,
evidently. In the same way he calls Meriones too a
servant of Idomeneus, 

 
Observe also tliat in the same passage it is not
Idomeneus, the son of Zeus, whom he thinks fit to
call “unyielding in battle,” but Meriones, his
parasite.

Again, was not Aristogeiton, who was a man of
the people and a pauper, as Thucydides says, parasite
to Harmodius? Was he not his lover also? Naturally
parasites are lovers of those who support them.
Well, this parasite restored the city of Athens to
freedom when she was in bondage to a tyrant, and
now his statue stands in bronze in the public square
along with that of his favourite. 

 
Certainly these men, who were of such distinction,
were very doughty parasites.

What is your own inference as to the character of
the parasite in war? In the first place, does he not
get his breakfast before he leaves his quarters to fall
in, just as Odysseus thinks it right to do? Under no
other circumstances, he says, is it possible to continue
fighting in battle even if one should be obliged to
begin fighting at the very break of day. While the
other soldiers in affright are adjusting their helmets
with great pains, or putting on their breastplates, or
quaking in sheer anticipation of the horrors of war,
the parasite eats with a very cheerful visage; and
directly after marching out he begins to fight in the first line. The man who supports him is posted in
the second line, behind the parasite, who covers





 

him with his shield as Ajax covered Teucer, and
when missiles are flying exposes himself to protect
his patron; for he prefers to save his patron rather
than himself.

If a parasite should actually fall in battle, certainly
neither captain nor private soldier would be ashamed
of his huge body, elegantly reclining as at an elegant
banquet. Indeed it would be worth one’s while to
look at a philosopher’s body lying beside it, lean,
squalid, with a long beard, a sickly creature dead
before the battle! Who would not despise this city
if he saw that her targeteers were such wretches?
Who, when he saw pale, long-haired varlets lying
on the field, would not suppose that the city for
lack of reserves had freed for service the malefactors
in her prison?
That is how parasites compare with rhetoricians
and philosophers in war.

In peace, it seems to me,
Parasitic excels philosophy as greatly as peace itself
excels war.
First, if you please, let us consider the strongholds
of peace.
 
 TYCHIADES 
I do not understand what that means, but let us
consider it all the same.
 
 SIMON 
Well, I should say that market-places, law-courts,
athletic fields, gymnasia, hunting-parties and dinners
were a city’s strongholds.

 

 TYCHIADES 
To be sure.
 
 SIMON 
The parasite does not appear in the market-place
or the courts because, I take it, all these points are
more appropriate to swindlers, ‘and because nothing
that is done in them is good form; but he frequents
the athletic fields, the gymnasia, and the dinners,
and ornaments them beyond all others. On the
athletic field what philosopher or rhetorician, once
he has taken his clothes off, is fit to be compared
with a parasite’s physique? What one of them
when seen in the gymnasium is not actually a
disgrace to the place? In the wilds, too, none of
them could withstand the charge of a beast; the
parasite, however, awaits their attack and receives it
easily, having learned to despise them at dinners ;
and neither stag nor bristling boar affrights him, but
if the boar whets his tusks for him, the parasite
whets his own for the boar! After a hare he is as
keen as a hound. And at a dinner, who could
compete with a parasite either in making sport or in
eating? Who would make the guests merrier? He
with his songs and jokes, or a fellow who lies there
without a smile, in a short cloak, with his eyes upon
the ground, as if he had come to a funeral and not
to a banquet? In my opinion, a philosopher at a
banquet is much the same thing as a dog in a bathhouse !

Come now, let us dismiss these topics and forthwith turn to the parasite’s way of living, considering
at the same time and comparing with it that of
the others. 

 
In the first place, you can see that the parasite

 

always despises reputation and does not care at
all what people think about him, but you will find
that rhetoricians and philosophers, not merely here
and there but everywhere, are harassed by selfesteem and reputation—yes, not only by reputation,
but what is worse than that, by money! The parasite feels greater contempt for silver than one would
feel even for the pebbles on the beach, and does not
think gold one whit better than fire. The rhetoricians, however, and what is more shocking, those
who claim to be philosophers, are so wretchedly
affected by it that among the philosophers who are .
most famous at present—for why should we speak
of the rhetoricians ?—one was convicted of taking
a bribe when he served on a jury, and another
demands pay from the emperor as a private tutor ;
he is not ashamed that in his old age he resides
in a foreign land on this account and works for
wages like an Indian or Scythian prisoner of war
—not even ashamed of the name that he gets
by it.

You will find too that they are subject to other
passions as well as these, such as distress, anger,
jealousy, and all manner of desires. The parasite is
far from all this; he does not become angry because
he is long-suffering, and also because he has nothing
to get angry at; and if he should become indignant
at any time, his temper does not give rise to any
unpleasantness or gloom, but rather to laughter, and
makes the company merry. He is least of all subject


 

to distress, as his art supplies him gratuitously with
the advantage of having nothing to be distressed
about. For he has neither money nor house nor
servant nor wife nor children, over which, if they go
to ruin, it is inevitable that their possessor should —
be distressed. And he has no desires, either for
reputation or money, or even for a_ beautiful
favourite.

TYCHIADES 
But, Simon, at least he is likely to be distressed by
lack of food.
 
 SIMON 
You fail to understand, Tychiades, that a priori:
one who lacks food is not a parasite. A brave man
is not brave if he lacks bravery, nor is a sensible man
sensible if he lacks sense. On any other supposition .
the parasite would not exist ; and the subject of our
investigation is an existent, not a non-existent
parasite. If the brave man is brave for no other
reason than because he has bravery at his command,
and the sensible man because he has sense at his
command, so, too, the parasite is a parasite because
he has food at his command ; consequently, if this
be denied him, we shall be studying some other sort
of man instead of a parasite.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Then a parasite will never lack food ?
 
 SIMON 
So it appears ; therefore he cannot be distressed,
either by that or by anything else whatsoever.

Moreover, all the philosophers and rhetoricians, to
a man, are particularly timid. At all events you will
find that most of them appear in public with a staff
—of course they would not have armed themselves
if they were not afraid—-and that they lock their
doors very securely for fear that someone might plot
against them at night. The parasite, however,
casually closes the door of his lodgings, just to prevent it from being opened by the wind, and when a
sound comes at night, he is no more disturbed than
as if it had not come, and when he goes through unfrequented country he travels without a sword; for .
he does not fear anything anywhere. But I have
often seen philosophers armed with bows and arrows
when there was nothing to fear; and as for staves,
they carry them even when they go to the bath and
to luncheon.

Again, nobody could accuse a parasite of adultery
or assault or larceny or any other offence at all, since
a man of that character would be no parasite; he
wrongs himself. Therefore if he should commit
adultery, for instance, along with the offence he
acquires the name that goes withit. Just as a good
man who behaves badly thereby acquires the name
of bad instead of good, so, I take it, if the parasite
commits any offence, he loses his identity and becomes identified with his offence. But not only are
we ourselves aware of such offences on the part of
rhetoricians and philosophers committed without

 

number in our times, but we also possess records of
their misdeeds left behind in books. And there are
speeches in defence of Socrates, Aeschines, Hyperides,
Demosthenes, and very nearly the majority of orators
and sages, whereas there is no speech in defence of a
parasite, and nobody can cite a suit that has been
brought against a parasite.

Granted that the life of a parasite is better than
that of a rhetorician or a philosopher, is his death
worse? Quite to the contrary, it is happier by far.
We know that most, if not all, of the philosophers
died as wretchedly as they had lived; some died by
poison, as a result of judicial sentence, after they had
been convicted of the greatest crimes; some had
their bodies completely consumed by fire; some
wasted away through retention of urine; some died
in exile. But in the case of a parasite no one can
cite any such death—nothing but the happy, happy
death of a man who has eaten and drunk; and any
one of them who is thought to have died by violence:
died of indigestion.

TYCHIADES 
You have satisfactorily championed the cause of
the parasite against the philosophers. Next try to
explain whether he is a good and useful acquisition to
his supporter ; for to me it seems that the rich play
the part of benefactors and philanthropists in supporting them, and that this is dishonourable to the
man who receives support.
 
 SIMON 
How silly df you, Tychiades, not to be able to


 

realise that a rich man, even if he has the wealth of
Gyges, is poor if he eats alone ; that if he takes the
gir without a parasite in his company he is considered
a pauper, and that just as a soldier without-arms, or
a mantle without a purple border, or a horse without trappings is held in less esteem, so a rich man
without a parasite appears low and cheap. Truly,
he is an ornament to the rich man, but the rich
man is never an ornament to the parasite.

Furthermore, it is no disgrace to him to be the rich man’s
parasite, as you imply, evidently assuming that
he is the inferior and the other a superior;
since surely it is profitable for the rich man to
support the parasite, seeing that, besides having him
as an ornament, he derives great security from his
service as bodyguard. In battle nobody would readily
attack the rich man while he saw the other standing
by, and in fact no one could die by poison who had a_
parasite ; for who would dare to make an attempt on
a man when a parasite tastes his meat and drink first ?
So the rich man not only is ornamented but is
actually saved from the greatest: perils by the
parasite, who faces every danger on account of his
affection, and will not suffer the rich man to eat
alone, but chooses even to die from eating with him.

TYCHIADES 
It seems to me, Simon, that you have treated of
everything without being in any degree inadequate

 

to your art. You are not deficient in preparation, as
you said you were; on the contrary, you are as
thoroughly trained as one could be by the greatest
masters. And now I want to know whether the very
name of Parasitic is not discreditable.
 
 SIMON 
Note my answer and see if you think itissatisfactory,
and try on your part to answer my question as you
think best. Come, now, what about the noun from
which it is derived? To what did the ancients
apply it?
To food.
 
 TYCHIADES 
 SIMON 
And what about the simple verb, does it not
mean “to eat”?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Yes.
 
 SIMON 
Then we have admitted, have we not, that to be a
parasite is nothing but to eat with someone else ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
) Why, Simon, that is the very thing which seems
discreditable !

SIMON 
Come, then, answer me another question. Which
seems to you to be the better, and which should you
choose if both were open to you, to voyage or to
voyage with someone else ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
To voyage with someone else, for my part.

 

 SIMON 
To run, or to run with someone else ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
To run with someone else.
 
 SIMON 
To ride, or to ride with someone else?
 
 TYCHIADES 
To ride with someone else.
 
 SIMON 
To throw the javelin, or to throw it with someone
else ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
To throw it with someone else.
 
 SIMON 
Then, in like manner, should you not choose to eat
with someone else, rather than just to eat ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
I cannot but admit it. Hereafter I shall go to you
_ like a schoolboy both in the morning and after
luncheon to learn your art. You, for your part,
ought to teach me ungrudgingly, for I shall be your
first pupil. They say that mothers love their first
children more.