He suffers much, who for a dowry has 
							 His body sold,— 
						 
					 
				 
				 as Euripides says; for he gets but small matters by it, and those very uncertain.
					But to him who passes not through much ashes, but through a certain regal pile
					of fire, being perpetually short breathed, full of fear, and bathed in sweat as
					if he had crossed the seas to and fro, she gives at last a certain Tantalian
					wealth, which he cannot enjoy by reason of the continual turmoil that encumbers
					him. For that Sicyonian horse-courser was well advised, who presented the king
					of the Achaeans with a swift-footed mare, That to proud
						Ilium's siege he might not go, 
					 
				 
				 but stay at home and take his pleasure, wallowing in the 
					depth of his riches, and giving himself up to an unmolested ease. 
				 But those who now seem to be without trouble and men of action do, without being
					called to it, thrust themselves headlong into the courts of princes, where they
					must be obliged to tedious attending and watching, that they may gain an horse,
					a chain, or some such blessed favor. 
						 
							 In the mean time the wife, of joy bereft, 
							 Sits tearing her fair cheeks, the house is left 
							 Imperfect and half built;— 
						 
					 
				 
				 whilst the husband is drawn and hurried about, wandering amongst others, allured
					by hopes of which he is often disappointed, suffering disgrace and same. But if
					he happens to obtain any of those things he so eagerly desires, after he has
					been turned about and made dizzy with being Fortune's sport, he seeks a
					dismission, and declares those to be happy who live obscure and safe; whilst
					they, in the mean time, have the same opinion of him whom they see mounted so
					far above them.

So absolutely does Vice dispose of all men, being such a self-sufficient worker
					of infelicity, that it has no need either of instruments or servants. Other
					tyrants, endeavoring to render those men miserable whom they punish, maintain
					executioners and tormentors, devise searing-irons and racks, to plague the
					reasonless soul. But Vice, without any preparation of engines, as soon as it
					enters into the soul, torments and dejects it, filling a man with grief,
					lamentations, sorrow, and repentance. For a sign that this is so, you may
					observe that many being cut are silent, being scourged take it patiently, and
					being racked and tormented by their lords and tyrants send not forth the least
					shriek, since the soul, repressing the voice by reason, restrains and keeps it
					in as with the hand; but you will scarce ever be able to quiet anger or to
					silence sorrow; nor can you persuade one that is in a fright to stand still, or
					one that is stung with remorse of conscience to forbear
					exclaiming, tearing his hair, and smiting his thigh. So much is Vice more
					violent than either fire or sword.

Cities, when by fixing up of writings they publish their intentions of building
					temples or erecting colossuses, hear the proposals of different artists,
					contending about the undertaking of the work, and bringing in their accounts and
					models; after which, they choose him who will perform it best, quickest, and
					with the least expense. Now imagine, that we also set forth a proclamation of a
					purpose to make a wretched man or a miserable life, and that Fortune and Vice
					come with differing proposals to offer their service for the performance of this
					design. The one (to wit, Fortune) is provided with abundance of various
					instruments and costly furniture, to render human life miserable and unhappy.
					She draws after her robberies, wars, the murders of tyrants, storms from the
					sea, and lightnings from the air. She mixes hemlock, brings in swords, hires
					slanderers, kindles fevers, jingles shackles, and builds up prisons round about;
					although most of these things are rather from Vice than Fortune. But let us
					suppose them to be all from Fortune; and let Vice, standing naked and wanting no
					exterior things against man, ask Fortune how she will make a man unhappy and
					faint-hearted. 
				 Fortune, let her say, dost thou threaten poverty? Metrocles laughs at thee, who
					sleeping in the winter amongst the sheep, and in the summer in the porches of
					the temples, challenged the kings of the Persians, that wintered in Babylon and
					passed the summer in Media, to vie with him for happiness. Dost thou bring on
					servitude, bonds, and the being sold for a slave? Diogenes contemns thee, who
					being exposed to sale by pirates, cried out, Who will buy a master? Dost thou
					brew a cup of poison? Didst thou not offer such a one to Socrates? And yet he
					mildly and meekly, without trembling or changing either color or countenance, drank it briskly up; whilst those who survived
					esteemed him happy, as one that would not be even in the other world without a
					divine portion. Moreover, as for thy fire, Decius the Roman general prevented
					it, when, having caused a great fire to be made in the midst between two armies,
					he sacrificed himself to Saturn, according to a vow made for the aggrandizing of
					the Romans' dominion. And amongst the Indians, such chaste wives as are true
					lovers of their husbands strive and contend with one another for the fire, and
					all the rest sing forth the happiness of her who, having obtained the victory,
					is burnt with her deceased husband. And of the Sages in those parts, there is
					not one esteemed a holy and most blessed man, if he did not, whilst he was yet
					living and in the perfect enjoyment of his health and understanding, separate by
					fire his soul from his body, and purging away what was mortal, depart pure out
					of the flesh. 
				 But thou wilt reduce one from great wealth, a stately house, a well-furnished
					table, and abundance of all things, to a threadbare coat, a wallet, and begging
					of his daily food. These things were to Diogenes the beginnings of happiness,
					and to Crates of liberty and glory. But thou wilt, perhaps, fasten one to the
					cross, or impale him on a stake. Now what cares Theodorus, whether it is above
					or under ground that he putrefies? These were the happy sepultures of the
					Scythians; and amongst the Hyrcanians, dogs—amongst the Bactrians,
					birds—do according to the laws devour the dead bodies of those who have
					made a blessed end.

Whom then do these things render unhappy? The unmanly and irrational, the
					effeminate and unexercised, with such as retain the foolish and frightful
					opinions they received in their infancy. Fortune then does not perfectly produce
					infelicity, unless it has Vice to co-operate with it. For as a thread will cut
					in sunder a bone that has been steeped in ashes and
					vinegar, and as workmen bend and fashion ivory as they please, after it has been
					softened and rendered pliable by beer, when it is otherwise inflexible; so
					Fortune, coming upon that which is already ill-affected of itself and rendered
					soft by Vice, pierces into it and hollows it. And as the paroecus,—though
					hurtful to no other, nor any way prejudicing those who touch it or bear it about
					them,—if any one who is wounded is but brought into the place where it is,
					immediately kills him, being already by his wound predisposed to receive the
					defluxion; so the soul which is to be overthrown by Fortune must have in itself
					some ulcer of its own, and some malady within its flesh, that it may render
					those accidents which come from abroad miserable and lamentable.

Is then Vice also such that it should stand in need of Fortune's help for the
					working of infelicity? By no means. She does not make the sea swell with storms
					and tempests, she besets not the deserts lying at the feet of the mountains with
					robbers, she pours not down storms of hail on the fruitful fields, she raises
					not up Meletus, Anytus, and Callixenus, to be calumniators, she takes not away
					wealth, she hinders not any from the command of armies, that she may make men
					unhappy; but she renders them rich, abounding in wealth, having great
					inheritances on the earth; she bears them company at sea; she sticks close to
					them, pining them with lust, inflaming them with wrath, overwhelming them with
					superstitions, drawing them by their eyes.... The rest is wanting.