INTRODUCTION 
				 At some time in the second century before Christ ten Attic orators were
					selected, probably by Apollodorus of Pergamum, as the orators whose speeches
					were most worthy of preservation and study, and this Canon of the Ten Attic Orators was generally accepted. The Lives of these orators which are contained in
					manuscripts of Plutarch's Moralia were certainly not
					written by Plutarch. They are altogether lacking in the charm which
					characterizes Plutarch's careful and elaborate style. Facts are stated one after
					another with little variety and with little or no distinction between mere
					anecdotes and matters of real importance; but the Lives 
					are of interest on account of their subject matter. 
				 The decrees appended to the Lives are, except in some details, fairly accurate copies of official
					documents (see F. Ladek, Wiener Studien , xiii., 1891,
					pp. Ill ff.). The two which are concerned with Demosthenes and his family are
					not really decrees, but petitions addressed to the Senate, copies of which were
					undoubtedly kept among the official records at Athens, whereas the third - that
					in honour of Lycurgus - is a decree of the people. A large part of the
					inscription recording this decree has been found and is published in the Inscriptiones Graecae , ii. No. 240 (editio minor, ii.
					No. 457), Dittenberger, 
					 Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum , third edition, No. 326.
					The text which has been handed down in the manuscripts of Plutarch varies
					somewhat from that of the inscription, but hardly more than is to be expected.
					It may well be that whoever appended the decrees to
					the Lives of the orators derived them, not directly from
					inscriptions or other official documents, but (as suggested by B. Keil in Hermes , xxx. pp. 210 ff.) from the work of Heliodorus
						 On Monuments . 
				 The Lives , with the decrees, 
					are published by Anton Westermann in his Biographi
						Graeci (1833 and 1845).

I. ANTIPHON 
				 Antiphon was the son of Sophilus, and his deme was Rhamnus. He was a pupil of
					his father (for his father was a sophist, and it is said that Alcibiades as a
					boy attended his school), and having acquired power in speaking - as some think,
					through his own natural ability - he entered upon a public career. And he set up
					a school and had his disagreement with Socrates on the subject of words, not in
					a contentious spirit, but for the sake of argument, as Xenophon has narrated in
					his Memoirs . 
					And he wrote some speeches for citizens who wanted them for their suits in the
					law-courts, being the first who practised this profession, as some say. At any
					rate no legal oration is extant of any of those who lived before his time, nor
					of his contemporaries either, because the custom of speech-writing had not yet
					arisen; there is none by Themistocles, Aristeides, or Pericles, although the
					times afforded them many opportunities and also occasions when such speeches
					were needed. And it was not for lack of ability that they refrained from such
					speech-writing, as is evident from what is said by the historians about each of
					the abovementioned orators. Yet all those whom we are able to record as having
					practised this kind of speeches, going back to the earliest occurrence, will be
					found to have followed Antiphon when he was already old; I
					mean such as Alcibiades, Critias, Lysias, and Archinus. He was also the first to
					publish rules of the art of oratory, being of sharp intellect, and for this
					reason he was nicknamed Nestor. 
				 And Caecilius, in the treatise he compiled about him, conjectures from the terms
					in which Antiphon is praised in the work of the historian Thucydides that he was
					the latter's teacher. In his
					speeches he is accurate and persuasive, clever in invention, ingenious in
					handling perplexing cases; he attacks unexpectedly, and he addresses his
					arguments to both the laws and the emotions, aiming especially at propriety. He
					was born at the time of the Persian wars and of the sophist Gorgias, who was
					somewhat older than he; and his life extended until the destruction of the
					democracy by the Four Hundred, in
					causing which he seems himself to have had a part, at one time by being
						trierarch of two ships, at another by being general and gaining many victories in battle and winning important
					alliances for the Four Hundred, by arming the men of military age, by manning sixty triremes, and by being on every occasion
					their envoy to Lacedaemon at the time when Eëtioneia had been
						fortified. 
					And after the overthrow of the Four Hundred he was indicted along with
					Archeptolemus, one of the Four Hundred, was found guilty, subjected to the
					punishments prescribed for traitors, thrown out unburied, and inscribed along
					with his descendants in the list of the disfranchised. But some tell us that he
					was put to death by the Thirty, as
					Lysias says in his speech in defence of Antiphon's daughter; for he had a
					daughter whom Callaeschrus claimed in marriage by legal process. And that he was
					put to death by the Thirty is told also by Theopompus in the fifteenth book of
					his Philippics 
					 ; but that must
					have been another Antiphon, the son of Lysidonides, whom Cratinus also, in his
					play The Flask , mentions as a rascal; for how could a
					man who had died previously and had been put to death by the Four Hundred be
					living again in the time of the Thirty? But there is also another story of his
					death: that he sailed as envoy to Syracuse when the tyranny of Dionysius the
					First was at its height, and at a convivial gathering the question arose what
					bronze was the best; then when most of the guests disagreed, he said that
					bronze was the best from which the statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton were
					made; and when Dionysius heard this, suspecting that the remark was intended to encourage an attack upon himself, he
					ordered that Antiphon be put to death. But others say that he was angry because
					Antiphon made fun of his tragedies. 
				 There are current sixty orations ascribed to this orator, twenty-five of which
					Caecilius says are spurious. He is ridiculed as a lover of money by Plato in his
						 Peisander . And he is said to have written tragedies both by himself and in
					collaboration with the tyrant Dionysius. But while he was still busy with poetry
					he invented a method of curing distress, just as physicians have a treatment for
					those who are ill; and at Corinth, fitting up a room near the market-place, he
					wrote on the door that he could cure by words those who were in distress; and
					by asking questions and finding out the causes of their condition he consoled
					those in trouble. But thinking this art was unworthy of him he turned to
					oratory. There are some who ascribe also to Antiphon the book On Poets by Glaucus of Rhegium. His most admired orations are the one
					concerning Herodes, that against Erasistratus about the peacocks, that on the
					Indictment, which he wrote in his own defence, and that against the general
					Demosthenes for moving an illegal measure. He wrote also a speech against the
					general Hippocrates and caused him to be convicted by default. 
				 Caecilius has appended a decree passed in the archonship of Theopompus, the year in which
					the Four Hundred were overthrown, according to which the
					senate voted the trial of Antiphon: Voted by the
						senate on the twenty-first day of the prytany. Demonicus of Alopecê
						was secretary, Philostratus of Pallenê was president. Andron moved in
						regard to the men whom the generals denounce for acting to the detriment of
						the State of the Athenians while serving as envoys to Lacedaemon and for
						sailing from the camp in a ship of the enemy and for having passed by land
						through Deceleia, namely Archeptolemus, Onomacles, and Antiphon, that they
						be arrested and brought before the court for trial. And the generals, with
						those members of the senate whom they shall co-opt to the number of ten, are
						directed to produce them in court, that they may be present at the trial.
						And the Thesmothetae shall summon them to-morrow, and when the
						summonses have been returned to the court, they shall propose that the
						chosen prosecutors and the generals and others, if anyone so desire, shall
						accuse them of treason; and whomsoever the court may convict, he shall be
						treated in accordance with the law which has been passed relating to
						traitors. 
				 
				 Under this enactment the judgement is written: Archeptolemus, son of Hippodamus, of Agryle, and Antiphon, son of Sophilus,
						of Rhamnus, both being present, were found guilty of treason. The sentence
						passed upon them was that they be handed over to the Eleven for execution,
						that their belongings be confiscated and ten per cent thereof be given to
						the Goddess, that their houses be torn down and boundary-stones be set up on
						their sites with the inscription Land of Archeptolemus and
						Antiphon the two traitors ; and that the two demarchs make a
						declaration of their property; and that it be
						forbidden to bury Archeptolemus and Antiphon at Athens or in any place ruled
						by the Athenians; and that Archeptolemus and Antiphon be attainted, and also
						their descendants legitimate and illegitimate; and that if anyone shall
						adopt any descendant of Archeptolemus or Antiphon, he who so adopts shall be
						attainted; and that this be inscribed on a bronze tablet, which shall be
						set up where the decrees relating to Phrynichus are placed.

II. ANDOCIDES 
				 Andocides was the son of Leogoras, son of that Andocides who once made peace
					between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians ; he was as regards his deme a
					Cydathenian or a Thorian 
					and was descended from nobles, and even, according to Hellanicus, from Hermes; for the race of
					heralds traces its origin to him. On this account, too, he was once chosen along
					with Glaucon to go with twenty ships to aid the Corcyraeans who were embroiled
					with the Corinthians. And after this he was accused of impiety as being one of those
					who mutilated the Hermae and as
					profaning the mysteries of Demeter [because at an earlier time he was dissipated and in a nocturnal revel had broken one of the
					images of the god, and when he was indicted refused to surrender the slave whom
					his accusers were looking for, so that he gained a bad name and was suspected
					and accused in the second suit also, which was brought shortly after the
					expedition went to Sicily, when the Corinthians sent in men from Leontini and
					Egesta and, as the Athenians hesitated about aiding them privately, they
					mutilated the Hermae about the market-place, as Cratippus says, and profaned the
					mysteries besides]. At his trial on these charges he was acquitted on condition
					that he should inform against the wrongdoers. He exerted himself greatly and
					discovered those who were guilty of the sacrilege, among whom he informed
					against his own father. And he brought about the conviction and death of all the
					others, but saved his father, although he had already been put in prison, by
					promising that he would be of great service to the city. And he kept his promise
					; for Leogoras caused the conviction of many men who were embezzling public
					funds and committing other misdeeds. And for these reasons he was acquitted of
					the charge. 
				 But Andocides, since his reputation in public life was not good, took to
					merchandising and became a friend of the Cypriote kings and many other men of
					note, at which time he abducted a girl of Athenian birth, daughter of Aristeides
					and his own niece, without the knowledge of her family, and sent her as a gift to the King of Cyprus. Then, when he was to be
					brought to trial for this, he stole her back again from Cyprus and was caught
					and put in prison by the king; but he ran away and came back to Athens at the
					time when the Four Hundred were in control of affairs. He was put in prison by
					them, but escaped, and again, when the oligarchy was overthrown, he... was
					banished from the city after the Thirty had taken over the government. He spent
					the period of his exile in Elis, but when Thrasybulus and his band
						returned, he also returned to the
					city. He was sent to Lacedaemon to negotiate a peace, but was suspected of
						wrongdoing and banished. He gives information about all this in
					the speeches which he wrote; for some of them he composed in his defence in the
					matter of the mysteries, and others when he was asking to be allowed to return
					home. There is also extant his speech On the Indictment ,
					also the Defence against Phaeax and the speech On the
						Peace . He flourished at the same time as Socrates the philosopher; the
					date of his birth was the seventy-eighth Olympiad, when Theogenides was
						archon at Athens, so that he was about ten years
						older than Lysias. The Hermes called the 
					Hermes of Andocides is named after him. It is a dedication of the tribe Aegeis
					and is called Hermes of Andocides because Andocides lived near it. He himself
					supplied the chorus for his tribe when
					it was competing in a dithyrambic contest, and he gained the victory, for which
					he set up a tripod on a high spot opposite the limestone Silenus. He is simple
					and free from artifice in his orations, plain and employing no figures of
					speech.

III. LYSIAS 
				 Lysias was the son of Cephalus, grandson of Lysanias, and great-grandson of
					Cephalus. His father was by birth a Syracusan but moved to Athens because he
					wished to live in that city and also because Pericles, son of Xanthippus,
					persuaded him to do so, as he was a personal friend of Pericles and they were
					connected by ties of hospitality, and he was a man of great wealth. But some say
					that he moved because he was banished from Syracuse when Gelo was tyrant. Lysias
					was born at Athens in the archonship of the Philocles who succeeded
						Phrasicles, in the second year of
					the eightieth Olympiad, and at first he was a schoolmate of the most prominent
					Athenians; but when the city sent the colony to Sybaris, which was afterwards
					renamed Thurii, he went out with his eldest brother Polemarchus (for he had two
					others, Euthydemus and Brachyllus), their father being
					already dead, to share in the allotment of land. This was in the archonship
					of Praxiteles, and he was then fifteen years old. He remained there, was
					instructed by the Syracusans Teisias and Nicias, acquired a house, had a share
					of the allotment, and was a citizen for thirty-three years, until Cleocritus was
					archon at Athens. But in the next year, when Callias was archon, 
					in the ninety-second Olympiad, when the misfortunes in Sicily had happened to the Athenians and unrest
					had arisen among the allies in general and especially those who dwelt in Italy,
					he was accused of favouring Athens and, with three hundred others, was banished.
					Arriving at Athens in the archonship of the Callias who succeeded
					Cleocritus, when the Four Hundred already had possession of the city, he
					remained there. But when the battle of Aegospotami had taken place and the Thirty had taken possession of the
						city, he
					was banished after having been there seven years. He was deprived of his
					property and lost his brother Polemarchus, but he himself escaped from the house
					in which he was kept to be executed (for it had two doors) and lived at Megara. But when the
					men at Phyle set about their return to
					Athens, he was seen to be more helpful than anyone else, since he supplied two
					thousand drachmas and two hundred shields and, when sent with Hermas, hired
					three hundred mercenaries and persuaded Thrasydaeus of Elis, who had become his
					guest-friend, to give two talents. For these services Thrasybulus, after the
					restoration of the exiles to the city and in the period of anarchy before Eucleides, proposed a grant of
					citizenship for him, and the popular assembly ratified the grant, but when
					Archinus had him up for illegality because it had not been previously voted by
					the senate, the enactment was declared void. And after losing his
					citizenship in this way, he lived the rest of his life at Athens with all the
					rights of citizenship except the vote and eligibility to office, and died there
					at the age of eightythree years or, as some say, seventy-six or, as others say, over eighty; and he lived to see Demosthenes as a
					youth. They say he was born in the archonship of Philocles. 
				 Four hundred and twenty-five orations attributed to him are current. Of these
					Dionysius and Caecilius and their school say that two hundred and thirtythree
					are genuine, and he is said to have lost his case with only two of them. There
					is also his speech in support of the enactment against which Archinus brought
					suit and deprived him of citizenship, and another against the Thirty. He was
					very persuasive and concise and produced most of his speeches for private
					clients. There are also Textbooks of Rhetoric prepared by him, and Public
					Addresses, Letters and Eulogies, Funeral Speeches, Love Speeches, and a Defence
					of Socrates addressed to the judges. In the matter of his
					diction he appears to be easy, although in fact he is hard to imitate. Demosthenes in his speech against Neaera says
					that he was in love with Metaneira, a fellow-slave with Neaera; but later he
					married the daughter of his brother Brachyllus. Plato also mentions him in the
						 Phaedrus 
					 as an able speaker and older than
					Isocrates. Moreover Philiscus, a pupil of Isocrates and comrade of Lysias, composed an elegiac poem to him, from which it is
					plain that he was earlier in years, which is indicated also by what Plato said.
					The verses are as follows: 
						 Now, O Calliope's daughter endowed with great eloquence, Phrontis, 
						 Show if thy wisdom is aught, if thou hast anything new. 
						 Him who is altered and changed to another form, him who in other 
						 Orders and manners of life hath a new body assumed, 
						 Thou must bring forth some herald of virtue to celebrate: Lysis 
						 
						 Gone to the dead and the gloom, there an immortal to dwell; 
						 One who will show unto all the love of my soul for my comrade, 
						 Show, too, the worth of the dead unto the whole of mankind. 
						 
					 He also wrote two speeches for Iphicrates, one against Harmodius, the
					other for use in accusing Timotheüs of treason, with both of which he won
					his case; but when Iphicrates accepted the responsibility for the actions of
						Timotheüs, assuming at the rendering of accounts the
					accusation for treason, he defended himself with the speech by Lysias; and he
					himself was acquitted, but Timotheüs was very heavily fined. And at the
					Olympic festival also he read a very great oration urging that the Greeks make
					peace with one another and overthrow Dionysius.

IV. ISOCRATES 
				 Isocrates was the son of Theodorus of Erchia, a citizen of the middle class, an
					owner of slaves who made flutes, through whom he gained a competence, so that he
					paid for a public chorus and gave his children an
						education (for he had other sons, Telesippus and Diomnestus, and also a
					daughter), and hence he is ridiculed on account of the flutes by Aristophanes
					and Strattis. Isocrates was born in the eighty-sixth Olympiad, in the archonship
					of Lysimachus of Myrrhinus, being twenty-two years younger than Lysias and
					seven years older than Plato. In his boyhood he was as well
					educated as any Athenian, for he attended the lectures of Prodicus of Ceos,
					Gorgias of Leontini, Teisias of Syracuse, and the orator Theramenes; and when
					the lastnamed was in danger of being arrested by the Thirty and had fled for
					safety to the altar of Hestia Boulaea, everyone else was terrified, but Isocrates alone arose to
					speak in his aid; and at first he was silent for a long time, then afterwards he
					was urged to be silent by Theramenes himself, who said that his misfortune would
					be more painful if any of his friends should share it. And it is said that
					certain rhetorical teachings of Theramenes - those which go under the name of
					Boton - were of use to Isocrates when he was falsely
					accused in the courts. But when he became a man he kept away from political
					affairs, since he had a weak voice and a timid disposition and had lost his inherited property in the war against the
					Lacedaemonians. It is evident that he composed speeches for others, but he
					delivered only one, that on the Exchange of Property. He set up a school and
					turned to philosophy and to writing out the results of his thinking, and he
					composed his Festival Oration and some others of an advisory nature, some of
					which he delivered himself and some of which he prepared for others to deliver,
					hoping that in this way he might lead the Greeks to think as they ought. But
					when he failed of his purpose he gave up that sort of thing and became the head
					of a school, at first, as some say, at Chios, where he had nine pupils. That was
					the time when, as he saw the tuition fees counted out, he burst into tears and
					said, Now I recognize that I have sold myself to these
						people. He would carry on conversation with all who desired it and was
					the first to make a distinction between contentious speeches and those of a
					political character, to which latter he devoted himself. And he also instituted
					at Chios public offices and the same constitution which existed in his native
					city. He made more money than any other sophist, so that he was even a
						trierarch. 
				 
				 His pupils numbered about one hundred, including among many others
					Timotheüs, son of Conon, with whom he visited many
					cities; and he composed the letters which Timotheüs sent to the Athenians,
					on account of which Timotheüs presented him with a talent out of the sum
					remaining after the relief of Samos. Pupils of his were also Theopompus of Chios, Ephorus of
					Cumae, Asclepiades who compiled the arguments of tragedies, and Theodectas of
					Phaselis, who afterwards wrote tragedies and whose monument stood as you go to
					the Bean-market along the Sacred Way which leads to Eleusis; it is now in
					ruins. There, too, were set up statues of the famous poets along with his; of
					these only the poet Homer exists now. And Leodamas the Athenian and Lacritus the
					Athenian law-maker and, as some say, Hypereides and Isaeus were his pupils. And
					they say that while he was still teaching oratory Demosthenes came to him eager
					to learn and said that he could not pay the thousand drachmas which he asked as
					tuition fee, but would give two hundred for one fifth of the instruction;
					whereupon Isocrates replied: We do not cut our
						instruction into bits, Demosthenes, but just as people sell fine fish whole,
						so, if you wish to be my pupil, I will sell you my course whole. 
				 
				 He died in the archonship of Chaerondas after hearing in the palaestra of
					Hippocrates the news of the battle of Chaeroneia; and he removed himself
					from life by abstaining from food for four days. Just before the end he
					declaimed the opening lines of three dramas of Euripides: 
						 Danaüs of fifty daughters fair the sire, 
						 
						 Pelops the Tantalid to Pisa came, 
						 
						 Once Sidon's city Cadmus having left. 
						 
					 He died at the age of ninety-eight or, as some say, one hundred years,
					for he could not endure the sight of Greece enslaved four times. A year (or, as some
					say, four years) before his end he wrote the Panathenaic Oration; and for the composition of the Festival Oration he took ten (but
					some say fifteen) years. This, they say, he derived from the speeches of Gorgias
					of Leontini and Lysias. The speech on the Exchange of Property he wrote at the age of eighty-two years, and
					those against Philip shortly before his death. When he was an old man he adopted
						 Aphareus, the youngest of the three sons of
					Plathanê, daughter of the orator Hippias. He acquired ample wealth, for he
					not only collected money from his pupils, but he also received from Nicocles,
					king of Cyprus, who was the son of Evagoras, twenty talents for the oration
					written in his honour. On account of his wealth he was envied and was proposed
					three times as trierarch. Twice he alleged illness and was exempted by petitions
					presented by his son, but the third time he undertook the duty and spent no
					small sum. To a father who said that he gave his son only a slave as companion
					he said, Go your ways, then, for you will have two
						slaves instead of one. He took part also in the competition offered by
					Artemisia in honour of Maussolus, but his Eulogy is not
					extant. He wrote also a Eulogy of Helen and a speech called the Areopagitic. He
					departed this life some say on the ninth day of his abstention from food, others
					on the fourth day at the time of the funeral of those who fell at Chaeroneia.
					His son Aphareus also wrote speeches. Isocrates was buried with his family near
						Cynosarges on the left side
					of the hill-he himself, his father Theodorus, and his mother; and her sister
					Anaco, the orator's aunt, and his adopted son Aphareus, and his cousin Socrates,
					son of Anaco Isocrates' mother's sister, and his brother
					Theodorus who had the same name as his father, and his grandsons, the sons of
					his adopted son Aphareus, Aphareus and his father Theodorus, and the latter's
					wife Plathanê, mother of the adopted son Aphareus. And over them there
					were six tablets which do not now exist. On the monument of Isocrates himself
					was a column thirty cubits high, on which was a siren seven cubits high as a
					symbol; but this exists no longer. There was also a tablet near by with poets
					and his instructors on it, among whom was Gorgias gazing into an astrological
					sphere and Isocrates standing beside him. There is also a bronze statue of him,
					dedicated by Timotheüs, son of Conon, at Eleusis in front of the vestibule.
					It bears this inscription: 
						 Here to the goddesses twain Timotheüs giveth this statue 
						 Tribute to friend and to sage, image of Isocrates. 
					 It is a work of Leochares. 
				 Sixty orations are current under his name, of which twenty-five are genuine
					according to Dionysius, twenty-eight according to Caecilius, and the rest are
					spurious. He was averse to public declamation, so much so that once, when three
					persons came to hear him, he retained two but let the third go, telling him to
					come the next day, since now the lecture-room had a full audience. And he used
					to say to his pupils that he himself gave instruction for ten minas, but would
					give ten thousand to anyone who would teach him self-confidence and a pleasant
					voice. And when he was asked how he, not being a good
					speaker himself, could make others so, he replied that whetstones cannot
					themselves cut, but make iron fit to do so. Some say that he also wrote
					textbooks of oratory, others that in his teaching he made use of practice, not
					of method. He never demanded a fee from a fellow-citizen. When his pupils went
					to meetings of the assembly, he told them to report to him what was said there.
					He was greatly grieved by the death of Socrates, and the next day he appeared in
					black clothing. And again, when someone asked him What
						is oratory? he said, the art of making small
						things great and great things small. And once when he was a guest at a
					banquet in the house of Nicocreon, despot of Cyprus, and some of those present
					urged him to discourse, he said, for subjects in which I
						am competent this is not the time; in the subjects for which this is the
						time I am not competent. 
					 When he saw the tragic
					poet Sophocles amorously following a boy, he said, Sophocles, we must not only keep our hands to ourselves, but our eyes as
						well. 
					 And when Ephorus
					of Cumae had left his school without learning anything and had been sent back by
					his father with a second tuition-fee, he called him in fun Diphorus
					(Twice-bringer); he took, however, great pains with him and even suggested to
					him the subject of his work. 
					He showred himself also prone to sexual indulgence; he used an additional
					mattress beside him on his bed and kept his pillow wet
					with saffron. And when he was young he did not marry, but in his old age he kept
					a mistress named Lagiscê, by whom he had a daughter who died unmarried at
					twelve years of age. Then he married the daughter of the orator Hippias,
					Plathanê, who had three sons, one of whom, Aphareus, as has been said
					above, he adopted. This Aphareus dedicated a bronze statue of him near the
					Olympieium on a column with the inscription: 
						 Aphareus set up this statue his father Isocrates' image, 
						 Sacred to Zeus, to exalt gods and his ancestors' worth. 
						 
					 And it is said that he rode a horse in a race when he was still a boy;
					for a bronze figure of him as a boy riding a horse is set up on the Acropolis in
					the ballground of the Arrhephoroi, as
					some have said. In all his life but two lawsuits were brought against him:
					first when Megacleides challenged him to an exchange of property. He did not
					appear in court in this suit, because he was ill, but sent his son Aphareus and
					won his case. The second suit was when Lysimachus challenged him to exchange
					property in connexion with the trierarchy; and this case he lost and performed
					the trierarchy. There was also a painted portrait of him in the Pompeium. Aphareus wrote speeches,
					both juridical and deliberative, but not many. He also composed about
					thirty-seven tragedies, but the authorship of tw o of them is contested. Beginning in the archonship of Lysistratus he presented in the
					twenty-eight years to the archonship of Sosigenes six series of dramas
					at the City Dionysia and won the prize twice, Dionysius as his manager, and, other poets managing, he presented two other
					series at the Lenaean festival. There were statues of the
					mother of Isocrates and Theodorus and of her sister Anaco set up on the
					Acropolis; of these the statue of the mother is now placed, with a changed
						inscription, near that of
					Hygieia, but the statue of Anaco is gone. She had two sons, Alexander by Coenus,
					and Sosicles by Lysias.

V. ISAEUS 
				 Isaeus was a Chalcidian by birth, but came to Athens and went to school [to
					Isocrates. He resembled] Lysias in his melodious diction and in his skilful arrangement and treatment of
					the subject matter in his speeches, so that unless a person were thoroughly
					familiar with their particular styles, he could not easily tell to which of the
					two orators many of the speeches belong. He was in his
					prime after the Peloponnesian War, as may be inferred from his speeches, and
					lived until the reign of Philip. He taught Demosthenes, not
					at his school, but privately, for ten thousand drachmas, whereby he acquired
					great distinction. And he himself composed for Demosthenes the speeches against
					his guardians, as some said. He has left behind him sixty-four speeches, fifty
					of which are genuine, and some rules of rhetoric of his own. He was also the
					first to give artistic form to his speech and to
					turn his attention to the urbane style of the orator; in which Demosthenes has
					closely imitated him. Theopompus the comic playwright mentions him in the Theseus .

VI. AESCHINES 
				 Aeschines was the son of Atrometus, who
					was exiled in the time of the Thirty and helped to restore the democracy, and of
					Glaucothea. He belonged to the deme of the Cothocidae and was not of
					distinguished family or great wealth. When he was young and physically strong he
					worked hard in the gymnasia; and afterwards, since he had a clear voice, he
					practised tragedy; and according to Demosthenes he was for a long time
					under-secretary and regularly played as a third-rate actor with Aristodemus at
					the Dionysiac festivals, repeating the old tragedies in his spare time. And while still a child he
					helped his father to teach letters, and as a young man he served in the patrol
					of the frontiers. After studying with Isocrates and Plato, as some say, but with
					Leodamas according to Caecilius, he was prominent in public life in the party opposed to that of
					Demosthenes, and was sent on many embassies, among them the one to Philip
					concerning the peace. For this he was accused by
					Demosthenes of having destroyed the Phocian nation and moreover of having
					stirred up war between the Amphissians, who were building the harbour when he
					was chosen as delegate to the Amphictyonic Council, and the Amphictyons; as a
					result of which the Amphictyons turned to Philip for protection, and he,
					assisted by Aeschines, took matters in hand and conquered Phocis. But through
					the aid of Eubulus, son of Spintharus, of the deme of Probalinthus, who had
					influence with the people, he was acquitted by thirty votes; but some say that
					though the orators composed their speeches, yet the suit
					never came to trial because the battle of Chaeroneia intervened. At a later time, when Philip was dead and
					Alexander was crossing over to Asia, he brought a suit against Ctesiphon for
					illegal conduct in proposing the honours for Demosthenes; and when he did not
					receive one-fifth of the votes cast, he went into exile at Rhodes, not being
					willing to pay a fine of a thousand drachmas for his defeat. But some say that he was further
					punished by disfranchisement and did not leave the city of his own accord, and
					that he went to Alexander at Ephesus. During the confusion following Alexander's
					death he sailed to Rhodes, set up a school there, and taught. He read to the
					Rhodians his oration against Ctesiphon as an exhibition of his powers, and when
					they all wondered that after delivering that speech he had lost his case, You would not wonder, Rhodians, he said, if you had heard Demosthenes speak in reply to it. 
					And he left a school behind him there, called the Rhodian school. Then he sailed
					to Samos and not long after, while lingering on that island, died. He had an
					excellent voice, as is clear from what Demosthenes says and from the oration of Demochares. 
				 Four orations are current under his name: that Against
						Timarchus , that On the False Legation , and that Against Ctesiphon , and these alone are
					genuine, since the one entitled the Delian Oration is
					not by Aeschines; for he was, to be sure, appointed associate advocate in the
					trial relating to the sanctuary at Delos, but he did not
					deliver the speech; for Hypereides was elected in his place, as Demosthenes
						says. He had, as he
					himself says, two brothers,
					Aphobetus and Philochares. He was the first to bring to the Athenians the news
					of the victory at Tamynae, for which he was crowned a second time. 
				 Some have said that Aeschines did not study under any teachers, but rose from
					the under-clerkship in the courts, which he held at that time. And they say that
					his first speech before the people was against Philip, by which he gained such
					reputation as to be chosen envoy to the Arcadians; and when he came to them he
					raised the ten thousand troops with which to oppose Philip. He also prosecuted
					for unchastity Timarchus, who gave up the defence and hanged himself, as
					Demosthenes says somewhere. He was elected envoy to Philip with Ctesiphon and Demosthenes to
					treat for peace, on which occasion he was more successful than Demosthenes; and
					the second time, when he was one of ten, he confirmed the peace with oaths, was tried for it, and was
					acquitted, as has been said above.

VII. LYCURGUS 
				 Lycurgus was the son of Lycophron and grandson of the Lycurgus whom the Thirty
					Tyrants put to death, his execution being brought about by Aristodemus of Batê, who also, after having been one of the
						Hellenotamiae, was
					banished under the democracy. Lycurgus was of the deme of the Butadae and the
					family of the Eteobutadae. He attended the lectures of Plato the philosopher and
					at first devoted himself to philosophy; then, after being a pupil of the orator
					Isocrates, he had a notable public career both as a speaker and as a man of
					action, and he was also entrusted with the management of the finances of the
					State; for he was made treasurer for three periods of four years in charge of fourteen thousand
					talents, or, as some say (and among them the man who proposed the vote of
					honours for him, Stratocles the orator), eighteen thousand, six
					hundred and fifty. 
					He was elected in his own person the first time, but afterwards he entered the
					name of one of his friends, though he himself administered the office, because a
					law had previously been introduced forbidding anyone elected treasurer of the
					public funds to hold the office more than four years; and he was always intent
					upon the public business summer and winter. When he was elected to provide
					munitions of war he restored many edifices in the city, he provided four hundred
					triremes for the people, he constructed the gymnasium in the Lyceum and planted
					trees in it, he built the palaestra and finished the Dionysiac theatre when he
					was the commissioner in charge of that work. He took care of two hundred
						 and fifty talents entrusted to him on deposit by
					private persons, he provided for the city objects of gold and silver for use in
					processions and golden Victories, and many buildings which came into his hands
					half-finished he completed, among them the ship-sheds and the arsenal. And he
					put the foundation-walls round the Panathenaic stadium. This he accomplished,
					and also the levelling of the ravine, because a certain Deinias who owned this
					plot of land gave it to the city when Lycurgus suggested to him that he make the
					gift. 
				 He was charged also with guarding the city and arresting malefactors, whom he
					drove out entirely, so that some of the sophists said that Lycurgus signed
					warrants against evil-doers with a pen dipped, not in ink, but in death. And
					therefore, when King Alexander demanded his surrender, the people did not give
					him up. When Philip was carrying on the second war with the Athenians, Lycurgus
					went as envoy with Polyeuctus and Demosthenes to the Peloponnesus and to some
					other States. Throughout his life he was always highly esteemed among the
					Athenians and considered a just man, so that in the courts of law the word of
					Lycurgus was regarded as a help to anyone requiring an advocate. 
				 He also introduced laws: the law relating to comic actors, that a competitive
					performance be held on the festival of Pots and that the victor's name 
					be inscribed as eligible for the City Dionysia, 
					which had not been permitted before, and thus he revived a contest which had
					fallen out of use; the law that bronze statues of the poets Aeschylus,
					Sophocles, and Euripides be erected, that their tragedies be written out and
					kept in a public depository, and that the clerk of the State read them to the
					actors who were to perform their plays for comparison of the texts and that it
					be unlawful to depart from the authorized text in acting; a third law that no
					Athenian or foreign resident of Athens should be permitted to buy from among
					captives a person of free birth to be a slave without the consent of his former
						master ; furthermore, that a festival of
					Poseidon should be held in Peiraeus, consisting of no fewer than three cyclic
					choruses, that not less than ten minas be given to the victors, eight to those
					ranked second by the judges, and six to those ranked third; furthermore, that no
					woman should go to Eleusis in a carriage, lest
					the women of the people appear inferior to the rich, and if any woman should be
					caught doing this, she should pay a fine of six thousand drachmas. His own wife
					disobeyed, the informers caught her in the act, and he gave them a talent; and
					at a later time, wrhen accused of this in the popular assembly, he said, At any rate I am found to
						have been the giver, not the receiver. 
					 And once
					when a taxcollector laid hands on Xenocrates the philosopher and Lycurgus met
					him as he was leading him away to enforce payment of his tax as a resident
						alien, he brought his walking-stick down on the tax-collector's
					head, set Xenocrates free, and shut the other man up in prison for improper
					conduct. As he was generally commended for his act, Xenocrates, happening to
					meet Lycurgus's children some days later, said I have
						repaid your father quickly for the favour he did me, boys; for he is widely
						commended for coming to my assistance. 
				 
				 He also proposed decrees, making use of a certain
					Olynthian named Eucleides, who was an expert in decrees. And although he was
					well-to-do, he wore one and the same cloak winter and summer and put on sandals
					only on days when they wTere necessary. He studied night and day, since he had
					no natural gift for extemporaneous speaking, and he lay on a cot with only a
					sheepskin and a pillow on it, so that he might wake up easily and study. When
					someone found fault with him for paying money to sophists although he made words
					his profession, he replied that if anyone would promise to make his sons better,
					he would pay him, not thousands only, but half his property. He was an outspoken
					speaker on account of his good birth. Once, indeed, when the Athenians were showing dissent as he was speaking, he burst out with
					: O Corcyraean whip, how ma ly talents you are
						worth! 
					 And when they were proclaiming Alexander a god, What sort of god, he said, is he when those who
							 come out of his temple have to sprinkle
						themselves with holy water? After his death his sons were handed over to
					the eleven executioners on the accusation of Menesaechmus, the indictment being
					written by Thrasycles; but when Demosthenes, who was at that time in exile,
					wrote a letter to the Athenians saying
					that their reputation was suffering because of Lycurgus's sons, they changed
					their mind and released them, Democles, a pupil of Theophrastus, speaking in
					their defence. He himself and some of his descendants were buried at public
					expense; and their monuments are opposite the Paeonian Athena in the garden of
					the philosopher Melanthius ; they are in the form of
					tables, and those of Lycurgus and his children have inscriptions and are still
					preserved in our day. His greatest achievement was the raising of the State
					revenue to twelve hundred talents when it had previously been sixty. When he was
					at the point of death he gave orders that he be carried to the temple of the
					Great Mother and into the Bouleuterion, as he wished to
					give an accounting for his public acts; and when no one had the face to accuse
					him except Menesaechmus, he freed himself from his false accusations, was carried to his house, and died, 
					having been considered a honourable man throughout his whole life, and highly
					praised for his speeches. He never was convicted, though many brought
					accusations against him. 
				 He had three children by Callisto, the daughter of Habron and sister of Callias
					the son of Habron of the deme Batê, the one who was treasurer of military
					funds in the archonship of Charondas. Deinarchus, in his speech against
					Pistius, tells about this connexion by marriage. He left three sons, Habron,
					Lycurgus, and Lycophron, of whom Habron and Lycurgus died without issue.
					However, Habron at any rate had a distinguished public career before he died;
					but Lycophron married Callistomachê, daughter of Philippus of
					Aexonê, and had a daughter Callisto. She was married to Cleombrotus of
					Acharnae, son of Deinocrates, to whom she bore a son Lycophron, who was adopted
					by his grandfather Lycophron and died without issue. After Lycophron's death
					Socrates married Callisto and had a son Symmachus. Symmachus had a son
					Aristonymus, he a son Charmides, and Charmides a daughter Philippa. Her son by
					Lysander was Medeius, who became an expounder of rites, being of the family of the Eumolpidae. He and
					Timothea, daughter of Glaucus, had three children, Laodameia and Medeius, who
					held the priestship of Poseidon-Erechtheus, and Philippa, who afterwards became
					priestess of Athena; but before that Diocles of Melitê married her, and
					their son was the Diocles who was general in command of the heavy-armed force.
					He married Hedistê, daughter of Habron, and bad two
					children, Philippides and Nicostrata. Themistocles, the Torch-bearer, son of Theophrastus, married Nicostrata and had two sons,
					Theophrastus and Diocles. He also organized the priesthood of
					Poseidon-Erechtheus. 
				 Fifteen speeches of the orator are current. He was crowned by the people many times and was honoured with
					statues. A bronze statue of him stands in the Cerameicus, set up in accordance with a
					decree passed in the archonship of Anaxicrates, in which year Lycurgus and his eldest descendant were granted
					maintenance in the Prytaneum by the same decree. After Lycurgus died his eldest
					son, Lycophron, brought a suit for the grant. Lycurgus spoke also many times on
					religious matters, bringing suit against Autolycus the Areopagite, Lysicles the
					general, Demades the son of Demeas, Menesaechmus, and many others, and he caused
					them all to be convicted. He also brought Diphilus to trial, who removed from
					the silver mines the rock props which supported the weight above and made
					himself rich from them contrary to the law; and though the penalty for this was
					death, Lycurgus brought about his conviction, and from the confiscated estate
					distributed fifty drachmas to every citizen, since the total sum collected was
					one hundred and sixty talents or, as some say, he distributed a mina to each citizen. He it was who
					called Aristogeiton, Leocrates, and Autolycus to account for cowardice. Lycurgus
					was nicknamed Ibis, 
					 An ibis for Lycurgus, for Chaerephon a bat. 
					 His family was derived ultimately from Erechtheus, the son of Gaea and
					Poseidon, but in the nearest generations from Lycomedes and Lycurgus, whom the
					people honoured with funerals at the public expense; and this succession from
					father to son of those of the family who have been priests of Poseidon exists on
					a complete tablet which has been set up in the Erechtheum, painted by Ismenias
					the Chalcidian; and there are wooden statues of Lycurgus and his sons Habron,
					Lycurgus, and Lycophron, made by Timarchus and Cephisodotus, the sons of
					Praxiteles. But the tablet was put up by his son Habron, who received the
					priesthood by inheritance and handed it over to his brother Lycophron; and that
					is why Habron is represented as handing Lycophron the trident. And Lycurgus had
					a record made of all his acts as a public official and set it up on a tablet,
					for all men to see who wished, in front of the palaestra that he had built; no
					one, however, could convict him of embezzlement. He made the motion to crown
					Neoptolemus the son of Anticles and to set up a statue of him because he had
					promised to gild the altar of Apollo in the Market-place in
					accordance with the God's prophecy. He also moved a decree granting honours to
					Diotimus, son of Diopeithes, of the deme Euonymus, in the archonship of
						Ctesicles.

VIII. DEMOSTHENES 
				 Demosthenes, son of Demosthenes and Cleobulê daughter of Gylon, was of the
					deme Paeania. He was left an orphan at the age of seven years by his
					father, along with his five-year-old sister, and lived during his minority with
					his mother. Some say that he went to school to Isocrates, but most authorities
					say that he went to Isaeus of Chalcis, who was a pupil of Isocrates living in
					Athens. He imitated Thucydides and also the philosopher Plato, whose
					instruction, some say, he followed with especial zeal. But Hegesias of Magnesia
					says that he asked his attendant to let him hear Callistratus of Aphidna, son of
					Empedus, a noted orator who had been a commander of cavalry and had set up the
					altar to Hermes-of-the-Market and was about to address the popular assembly;
					and Demosthenes, when he had heard him speak, fell in love with oratory.
					Demosthenes heard him, it is true, for only a short time, as long as
					Callistratus remained in Athens; but when he had been banished to Thrace and
					Demosthenes had finished his service as ephebe, he went over to
					Isocrates and Plato; then he took Isaeus into his house
					and for four years exerted himself to imitate his speeches. But Ctesibius says
					in his work On Philosophy that through Callias of
					Syracuse he obtained the speeches of Zethus of Amphipolis and through Charicles
					of Carystus those of Alcidamas and that he studied them thoroughly. 
				 When he attained his majority, because he received from his guardians less than
					was right, he brought them to trial for their administration, in the archonship
					of Timocrates. There were three of them: Aphobus, Therippides, and Demophon or
					Demeas, and he accused the last-named especially, since he was his mother's
						brother. He fixed the penalty in each suit at
					ten talents, and he obtained conviction of all three defendants; but he exacted
					no part of the penalty, for he let them off, some for money and some as an act
					of grace. When Aristophon at last
					on account of age resigned political leadership, Demosthenes was even made
						choregus. And wThen
					Meidias of the deme of Anagyros struck him as he was performing his duties in
					the theatre as choregus, he sued him for the act, but on receipt of three
					thousand drachmas he dropped the suit. They say that when he was still a young
					man he withdrew into a cave and studied there, shaving half of his head to keep
					himself from going out; also that he slept on a narrow bed
					in order to get up quickly, and that since he could not pronounce the sound of R
					he learned to do so by hard work, and since in declaiming for practice he made
					an awkward movement with his shoulder, he put an end to the habit by fastening a
					spit or, as some say, a dagger from the ceiling to make him through fear keep
					his shoulder motionless. They say, too, that as he progressed in his ability to
					speak he had a mirror made as large as himself and kept his eyes on it while
					practising, that he might correct his faults; and that he used to go down to
					the shore at Phalerum and address his remarks to the roar of the waves, that he
					might not be disconcerted if the people should ever make a disturbance; and
					that because he was short of breath he paid Neoptolemus the actor ten thousand
					drachmas to teach him to speak whole paragraphs without taking breath. 
				 And when he entered upon political life, finding that the public men of the city
					were divided into two parties, one favouring Philip and the other addressing the
					populace in defence of liberty, he enrolled himself among those opposed to
					Philip and always constantly advised the people to support the cause of those
					peoples which were in danger of being subjected by Philip, in which policy he
					was associated with Hypereides, Nausicles, Polyeuctus, and Diotimus; and thus
					he also brought the Thebans, Euboeans, Corcyraeans, Corinthians, Boeotians, and
					many others into alliance with the Athenians. Once he was hissed out of the
					assembly and was walking home feeling discouraged; but Eunomus of the deme
					Thria, who was already an old man, happened to meet him and encouraged him, and
					more than anyone else the actor Andronicus, by telling him that his words were excellent but that his
					delivery was deficient, and then Andronicus declaimed from memory the speech
					which Demosthenes had delivered in the assembly; whereupon Demosthenes was
					convinced and put himself in the hands of Andronicus. Therefore when someone
					asked him what was the first thing in oratory, he replied Delivery, and what the second, Delivery, and the third, Delivery. 
					 And when he spoke again in the assemblies he was hissed for some
					new-fangled expressions, so that Antiphanes and Timocles made fun of him in
					their comedies, By earth, by founts, by rivers, and by
							floods, 
					 for it was by swearing in this way that he had caused an uproar in the
					assembly. He used also to swear by Asclepius, putting the accent on the third
					syllable from the end, though it is properly on the final syllable; and he
					offered, a proof that he was right, for he said that the god was mild ( epios ). For this also
					he often provoked a clamour from the audience. But by going to school to
					Eubulides the Milesian philosopher he corrected all his faults. Once when he was
					at the Olympic festival and heard Lamachus of Tereina reading a eulogy of Philip
					and Alexander fand decrying the Thebans and Olynthians, he stood up and quoted
					the words of the ancient poets testifying to the glorious deeds of the Thebans
					and Olynthians, with the result that Lamachus was silenced
					and fled from the festival. And Philip said to those who reported to him the
					public speeches of Demosthenes against him, I myself, if
						I had heard Demosthenes speak, would have elected the man general to carry
						on the war against me. And Philip used to say that Demosthenes' speeches
					were like soldiers because of their warlike power, but those of Isocrates were
					like athletes, because they afforded pleasure like that of a show. 
				 When he was thirty-seven years old, reckoning from the archonship of
						Dexitheus to that of Callimachus, who was in office when an embassy came
					from the Olynthians asking for help because they were being hard pressed by
					Philip in the war, he persuaded the Athenians to send the help; but in the
					following year, in which Plato died, Philip overthrew the Olynthians.
					Xenophon, the follower of Socrates, knew him either in his youth or in his prime
					; for Xenophon's Hellenica ended with the battle of
					Mantineia and the archonship of Charicles, and Demosthenes had already before that
					time, in the archonship of Timocrates, caused the conviction of his guardians.
					When Aeschines fled after his condemnation, he followed him on horseback, and Aeschines,
					thinking he was arresting him, fell at his feet and covered his head, but
					Demosthenes raised him up, encouraged him, and gave him a talent of silver. And
					he advised the people to support a force of mercenaries at
					Thasos, and sailed out as commander of a trireme on that occasion. After he had
					been in charge of the food supply he was accused of embezzlement but was
					acquitted. When Philip had taken Elateia Demosthenes himself went out with those
					who fought at Chaeroneia, on which
					occasion it appears that he deserted his post, and that, as he was running away,
					a bramble-bush caught his cloak, whereupon he turned and said, Take me alive. And he had as a device on his shield
					the words With good fortune. 
					 However, he delivered the
					funeral address for those who fell. And
					after that, directing his efforts to the improvement of the city and being
					elected commissioner in charge of the fortifications, he contributed out of his
					own pocket the funds expended, amounting to one hundred minae; he also
					presented ten thousand drachmas for sacred
						envoys, and he made a
					cruise in a trireme to the allied cities collecting money. For these activities
					he was crowned many times, on earlier occasions on motions offered by Demomeles,
					Aristonicus, and Hypereides with golden crowns, and the last time on the motion
					of Ctesiphon; and when the decree granting this honour was attacked as illegal
					by Diodotus and Aeschines, he was so successful in his defence that the accuser
					did not receive one-fifth of the votes. 
				 And at a later time, when Alexander was campaigning in Asia and Harpalus came fleeing to Athens with
					money, at first Demosthenes kept him from being admitted, but after he had
					entered the harbour, Demosthenes accepted one thousand darics and changed his
					attitude, and when the Athenians wished to surrender the man to Antipater, he
					spoke against it and made a motion that Harpalus deposit the money on the
					Acropolis without even stating the amount to the people; and although Harpalus
					stated that he had brought with him seven hundred talents, that which was taken
					up to the Acropolis was found to amount to only three hundred and fifty or a
					little more, as Philochorus says. And after this, when Harpalus escaped from the
					prison in which he was being kept until a representative of Alexander should
					arrive, and had gone to Crete or, as some say, to Taenarum in Laconia,
					Demosthenes was accused of bribe-taking and of having this reason for not
					mentioning the amount of the money taken up or the carelessness of the guard. He
					was brought to trial by Hypereides, Pytheas, Menesaechmus, Himeraeus, and
					Patrocles, and they obtained his conviction by the Senate of the Areopagus; and
					after his conviction he went into exile, not being able to pay back five times
					the amount (he was accused of having accepted thirty talents), or, as some say,
					he did not wait for the trial. After this time the Athenians sent Polyeuctus as
					envoy to the commonwealth of the Arcadians in order to detach them from their
					alliance with the Macedonians, and when Polyeuctus was unable to persuade them,
					Demosthenes appeared to help him and did persuade them. For this he was admired,
					and after some time he was permitted to return, a decree in his favour having
					been passed and a trireme dispatched to bring him. When
					the Athenians passed a decree proposed by his cousin Demon of Paeania that he
					should use the thirty talents which he owed in adorning the altar of Zeus the
					Saviour at Peiraeus and should then be absolved, he returned on those conditions
					to public life. 
				 When Antipater was shut up in Lamia by the Greeks, and the Athenians were making
					thankofferings for the good news, he said to his friend Agesistratus that he did
					not agree with the rest about these matters, for, he
					said, I know that the Greeks have both the knowledge and
						the strength for a stadium dash in warfare, but cannot hold out for a long-distance
						run. When Antipater had taken Pharsalus and threatened to besiege the
					Athenians unless they surrendered the orators, Demosthenes left the city and
					fled first to Aegina to sit as suppliant in the sanctuary of Aeacus, but was
					frightened and changed over to Calauria; and when the Athenians voted to
					surrender the orators including himself, he took his seat as a suppliant there
					in the temple of Poseidon. And when Archias, nicknamed Exile Hunter, who had been a pupil of the orator Anaximenes, came to
					fetch him and urged him to leave his sanctuary, indicating that Antipater would
					receive him as a friend, he said, Your acting in tragedy
						was not convincing to me, nor will your advice be convincing now ; and
					when Archias tried to use force, the authorities of the city prevented him, and
					Demosthenes said, I took refuge in
						Calauria, not to save my life, but to convict the Macedonians of using force
						even against the sanctuaries of the gods, and asking for writing
					materials he wrote - so Demetrius of Magnesia says - the distich which was later
					inscribed by the Athenians upon his statue: 
						 Had you possessed but the strength, Demosthenes, like to your spirit; 
						 Never would Macedon's war Greece to submission have brought. 
						 
					 The statue, a work of Polyeuctus, is placed near the Roped-off
						Enclosure and the altar of the Twelve Gods. But
					according to some authorities he was found to have written Demosthenes to Antipater, greeting. 
					 Philochorus says that he died by drinking
					poison, but Satyrus the historian says that the pen with which he began to write
					the letter was poisoned, and he died by sucking it; and Eratosthenes says that
					for a long time he wore a poisoned bracelet on his arm through fear of the
					Macedonians. There are those who say that he died by holding his breath, but
					others assert that it was by sucking poison from his seal ring. He lived,
					according to those who give the higher number, seventy years, according to those
					who giye the lower, sixty-seven. He was active in politics twenty-two years. 
				 
				 When Philip died, Demosthenes came out from his house dressed in a white garment,
					in spite of the fact that his daughter had lately died, thus showing his joy at
					the death of the Macedonian. He also
					assisted the Thebans when they were at war with Alexander, and he always
					encouraged the rest of the Greeks; for which reason Alexander after razing
					Thebes demanded him of the Athenians and threatened them if they should refuse
					to surrender him. And when Alexander was making war on the Persians and called
					upon the Athenians for a naval force, he spoke against it, saying that it was
					not clear whether Alexander would not employ the force against those who
					furnished it. 
				 He left two sons by one wife of noble family, daughter of a certain Heliodorus;
					and he had one daughter who died unmarried while still a child. He had also a
					sister to whom and her husband Laches of Leuconoë his nephew Demochares was
					born, a man both brave in war and inferior to none in political speeches. There
					is a statue of him in the Prytaneum, the first on the right as you go in towards the hearth,
					wearing both a cloak and a sword; for he is said to have worn this costume in
					addressing the people when Antipater was demanding the surrender of the orators.
					At a later time the Athenians voted maintenance in the Prytaneum to the
					relatives of Demosthenes and erected to him after his death the statue in the
						Market-place, in the archonship of Gorgias. The grants to him
					were requested by his nephew Demochares, for whom in turn
					his son Laches, son of Demochares, of Leuconoê, asked in the archonship of
						Pytharatus, the tenth year after, for grants extending to the erection of
					the statue in the Market-place, maintenance in the Prytaneum for Demochares and
					his eldest descendant in perpetuity, and front seats at all competitive
					spectacles. And the decrees in favour of both are inscribed, but the statue of
					Demochares mentioned above was transferred to the Prytaneum. 
				 Sixty-five genuine speeches of Demosthenes are current. Some say that he lived a
					dissolute life, wearing women's clothes and indulging in revels on every
					occasion, on which account he was nicknamed Batalus ; but others say that this was a diminutive derived from
					the name of his nurse and was given to him in reproach. And Diogenes the Cynic,
					seeing him once in a tavern looking ashamed and trying to withdraw from sight,
					said, The more you withdraw, the more you will be in the
						tavern. And he jeered at him, saying that in his speeches he was a
					Scythian, but in battle a city man. He received money from Ephialtes also, one
					of the politicians, who had been on an embassy to the King of Persia and came
					secretly bringing funds for distribution among the politicians for the purpose
					of stirring up the war against Philip; and they say that he received a private
					bribe of three thousand darics from the King. He arrested a certain Anaxilas of
					Oreus, who had been a guest-friend of his, subjected him to torture as a spy,
					and when he confessed nothing proposed a decree that he be
					handed over to the executioners. And once when he was being prevented by the
					Athenians from speaking in the assembly, he said that he only wished to speak
					briefly to them, and when they became silent he said, A
						young man in the summer time hired an ass to go from the city to Megara.
						When noon came and the sun was blazing fiercely, both he and the owner of
						the ass wished to lie down in its shadow. Each tried to prevent the other
						from so doing, the owner maintaining that he had rented him the ass, not its
						shadow, and the one who had hired the ass that he had complete rights in
						him. When he had said this, he began to go away; and when the Athenians
					stopped him and asked him to tell the rest of the tale, he said, You are willing to listen when I speak about the shadow
						of an ass, but when I speak of serious matters, you
						refuse. Once when Polus the actor told him that he received a talent as
					pay for acting two days, he replied, And I five talents
						for being silent one day. And when his voice failed in the assembly and
					the people jeered at him, he said It is actors who
						should be judged by their voices, but statesmen by their opinions. And
					when Epicles rebuked him for always preparing his speeches, he said, I should be ashamed to speak off-hand to such a great
						people. They say that he never put out his lamp until he was fifty years
					old - polishing his speeches. And he says himself that he was a
						waterdrinker. Lysias the orator was acquainted with
					him, and Isocrates saw him engaged in public affairs until the battle of
					Chaeroneia, as did some of the Socratic philosophers. He delivered most of his
						 speeches extemporaneously, as he was well endowed for
					that by nature. The first who moved that he be crowned with a crown of gold
					was Aristonicus of Anagyrus, son of Nicophanes, but Diondas prevented it by an
					affidavit.

IX. HYPEREIDES 
				 Hypereides was the son of Glaucippus and grandson of Dionysius, of the deme of
					Collytê. He had a son, Glaucippus, named after his grandfather, who was an
					orator and writer of speeches. He in turn had a son Alphinous. After being a pupil of the
					philosopher Plato, along with Lycurgus, and of the orator Isocrates, Hypereides
					entered upon public life at Athens at the time when Alexander was interfering in
					the affairs of Greece. And he spoke in opposition to him concerning the generals
					whose surrender he demanded of the Athenians and concerning the triremes. He
					also advised against disbanding the mercenary force at Taenarum under the
					command of Chares, since he was well disposed towards that general. At first he
					pleaded in suits at law in return for a fee. And since he was believed to have
					shared the Persian funds with Ephialtes, and was elected trierarch
					when Philip was besieging Byzantium, he was sent out to aid the Byzantines; and
					in that year he bore the expense of a chorus, 
					 when others were released from all contributions to the
					public service. He also proposed honours for Demosthenes, and when suit was
					brought by Diondas on the ground that the decree was contrary to law, he was
					acquitted. Although he was a friend of Demosthenes, Lysicles, Lycurgus, and
					their associates, he did not remain so to the end; but when Lysicles and
					Lycurgus were dead and Demosthenes was being tried for receiving bribes from
					Harpalus, he was chosen from all the orators (for he alone was unbribed) and
					brought the accusation against him. And when he was brought to trial by
					Aristogeiton for illegal conduct in proposing a decree after the battle of
					Chaeroneia to grant citizenship to the resident aliens, to set the slaves free,
					and to put the sacred objects, the children, and the women in Peiraeus for
					safekeeping, he was acquitted. And when certain persons blame d him for having
					disregarded many laws in his decree, he said, The
						shields of the Macedonians cast a shadow 
						over my eyes, and It was not I, but the battle
						of Chaeroneia, that proposed the decree. After this, however, Philip was
					frightened and granted permission to remove the bodies of the slain, though
					before that he had refused it to the heralds who came from Lebadeia. Later,
					however, after the battle of Crannon, when his surrender was demanded by
					Antipater and the people was on the point of surrendering him, he fled from the
					city to Aegina along with those against whom decrees had been passed. Here he
					met Demosthenes and excused himself for his disagreement
					with him. After leaving Aegina he was seized forcibly by Archias, nicknamed The
						Exile-Hunter (a Thurian by birth, at first an actor, but at that time an
					assistant of Antipater), in the temple of Poseidon while clinging
					to the statue of the god. He was brought to Antipater at Corinth, and when put
					to the torture he bit off his tongue that he might not be able to utter any
					secrets of his native city. And in this way he died, on the ninth day of the
					month of Pyanepsion. But Hermippus says that he went to Macedonia, where his tongue was cut out and
					he was thrown out unburied, and that Alphinous, who was his cousin (or, as some
					say, the son of his son Glaucippus), obtained possession of the body by the aid
					of a physician named Philopeithes, burned it and brought the bones to Athens to
					his relatives contrary to the decrees of the Athenians and the Macedonians; for
					they had ordered, not only that he be exiled, but that he be not even buried in
					his own country. And others say that he died at Cleonae after being brought
					there with the rest, where his tongue was cut out and he perished in the manner
					related above; and that his relatives obtained the bones and buried them with
					his ancestors before the gates of the Hippades, as Heliodorus says in the third book of his work On Monuments . But now the monument has fallen in ruins
					and cannot be identified. 
				 He is said to have excelled all in addressing the people; and by some critics
					he is ranked above Demosthenes. Seventy-seven speeches are current under his name, fifty-two of which are genuine. He was also very prone to sexual indulgence, so that he
					turned his son out of the house and brought in Myrrhina, the most expensive
					prostitute, kept Aristagora in Peiraeus, and at his own estate in Eleusis kept
					the Theban girl Phila, whom he had ransomed for twenty minas. He used to walk in
					the Fish-market every day. And, as it is indeed reasonable to suppose, it was
					because he had been intimate also with Phrynê the courtesan that when she was on trial for impiety he
					became her advocate; for he makes this plain himself at the beginning of his
						speech. And when she was likely to be found guilty, he led the woman out
					into the middle of the court and, tearing off her clothes, displayed her
					breasts. When the judges saw her beauty, she was acquitted. He quietly compiled
					accusations against Demosthenes and the fact became known; for once, when he
					was ill, Demosthenes came to his house to visit him and found him with the
					document against himself in his hand; and when Demosthenes was angry,
					Hypereides said, It will do you no harm while you are my
						friend, but if you become my enemy, it will prevent your doing anything
						against me. He also proposed a decree conferring
					honours upon Iolas, who was supposed to have given Alexander the poison. He took part with Leosthenes in
					the Lamian War and delivered the funeral oration for
					the fallen in marvellous fashion. When Philip was preparing to sail against
					Euboea, and the Athenians were afraid, he assembled forty triremes by private
					contributions, and in his own name and his son's he gave two triremes, the first
					contribution made. And when a dispute arose with the Delians as to which people
					should have control of the sanctuary, although Aeschines was chosen Athenian
					advocate, the senate of the Areopagus elected Hypereides; and his speech is the
					one entitled The Delian . He was also an envoy to the
					Rhodians. And when envoys came from Antipater and praised their sender as a good
					man, in replying to them he said, We know that he is
						good, but we do not want a good master. It is said that in addressing
					the public he did not employ the actor's art, that he merely related the facts
					of the case and did not bore the jurors even with these. He was sent also to the
					Eleans to defend the athlete Callippus against the charge of having used
					corruption in the contest, and he won his case; but when he brought a suit
					against the grant of a gift for Phocion, which Meidias, son of Meidias, of the
					deme Anagyros, proposed in the archonship of Xenias, on the twentyfourth day of Gamelion, he was defeated.

X. DEINARCHUS 
				 Deinarchus, son of Socrates or Sostratus, an Athenian according to some, but, as
					others think, a Corinthian, came to Athens while still young at the time when
					Alexander was invading Asia, settled there, and became a pupil of Theophrastus, who
					had succeeded Aristotle as head of his School ; but he also attended the lectures of Demetrius of Phalerum.
					He took part most actively in public affairs after the death of Antipater, since some of
					the public men had been put to death and the rest were in exile. Since he became
					a friend of Cassander he prospered exceedingly through the fees he charged for
					the speeches which he wrote for those who requested his services; and he had as
					his opponents the most distinguished public men, although he did not speak
					before the popular assembly (for he was unable to do so ); but he merely wrote speeches for
					their opponents. And when Harpalus absconded he composed many speeches against
					those who were accused of having accepted bribes from him, and these he
					furnished to their accusers. But at a later time he was accused of having
					dealings with Antipater and Cassander in connexion with their occupation of
					Munichia when it was garrisoned by Antigonus and Demetrius in the archonship of
						Anaxicrates, whereupon he turned most of his property into cash and went into
					exile at Chalcis. And after living in exile about fifteen years and amassing
					considerable wealth, he returned, his restoration, and at the same time that of the other exiles, having been effected by
					Theophrastus and his friends. He lodged at the house of a friend of his named
					Proxenus and lost his money, when he was already an old man and his eyes were
					weak, and when Proxenus refused to investigate the matter he brought a suit against him, and then for the first time he
					spoke in a court of law. His speech is extant, too. There are sixty-four speeches of his extant which are
					regarded as genuine; of these some are handed down as by Aristogeiton. He was a
					zealous follower of Hypereides or, as some say on account of his emotional and
					vehement qualities, of Demosthenes. He certainly is an imitator of the latter's
					figures of speech.

DECREES I 
				 Demochares of Leuconoê, son of Laches, asks for
					Demosthenes of Paeania, son of Demosthenes, the grant of a bronze statue in the
					Market-place and maintenance in the Prytaneum and the privilege of front seats
					at the public spectacles for him and for the eldest of his descendants in
					perpetuity, because he has shown himself as a public benefactor and counsellor,
					and has brought about many benefits for the people of the Athenians, not only
					having relinquished his property for the common weal but also having contributed
					eight talents and a trireme when the people freed Euboea, and another trireme
					when Cephisodorus sailed to the Hellespont, and another when Chares and Phocion
					were sent as generals to Byzantium by the vote of the popular assembly, and
					having ransomed many of those who were taken prisoners by
					Philip at Pydna, Methonê, and Olynthus, and having contributed the
					expense of a chorus of men because when the members of the tribe of Pandionis
					failed to furnish this chorus, he contributed the money and, besides, furnished
					arms to the citizens who lacked them; and when elected Commissioner of the
					Fortifications by the popular assembly he supplied the money for the work,
					himself contributing three talents in addition to the cost of two trenches about
					the Peiraeus, which he dug as his contribution. And after the battle of
					Chaeroneia he contributed a talent, and in the scarcity of food he contributed a
					talent for the food-supply. And because, through persuasion, benefactions, and
					the advice by which he moved them, he brought into alliance with the people the
					Thebans, Euboeans, Corinthians, Megarians, Achaeans, Locrians, Byzantines, and
					Messenians and gained troops for the people and its allies, namely ten thousand
					foot, one thousand horse, and a contribution of money which he as envoy
					persuaded the allies to give for the war - more than five hundred talents - and
					because he prevented the Peloponnesians from going to the aid of the Boeotians,
					giving money and going in person as envoy. And he advised the people to adopt
					many other excellent measures, and of all his contemporaries he performed the
					best public actions in the cause of liberty and democracy. And having been
					exiled by the oligarchy when the democracy had been destroyed, and having died
					at Calauria on account of his devotion to the democracy, when soldiers were sent
					against him by Antipater, persisting in his loyalty and devotion to the
					democracy and neither surrendering to its enemies nor doing anything in his time
					of danger that was unworthy of the democracy.

DECREES II 
				 Archon Pytharatus, Laches,
					son of Demochares, of Leuconoê, asks from the senate and people of the
					Athenians for Demochares, son of Laches, of
					Leuconoê, a grant of a bronze statue in the Market-place, and maintenance
					in the Prytaneum for him and the eldest of his descendants in perpetuity, and
					the privilege of a front seat at all public spectacles, because he proved
					himself a benefactor and a good counsellor to the people of the Athenians and
					benefited the people as follows: He was a good ambassador, proposer of
					legislation, and statesman [..., and he superintended] the building of the
					walls and the preparation of armour, missiles, and engines of war, he fortified
					the city at the time of the four years' war and made peace, truce, and alliance with the
					Boeotians, in return for which he was banished by those who overthrew the
					democracy. When he was recalled by the people in the archonship of Diocles, he first
					reduced the expenses of the administration and was sparing of the public
					resources; he went as envoy to Lysimachus and secured for the people thirty
					talents of silver and again one hundred more; he proposed the sending of an
					embassy to Ptolemy in Egypt, and those who took part in it brought back for the
					people fifty talents of silver; he was envoy to Antipater and secured twenty
					talents of silver which he brought to Eleusis for the people. He won the assent
					of the people to all these measures and accomplished them; he was exiled for
					the sake of the democracy, he took no part in any oligarchy, he held no office
					after the democracy had been overthrown, and he was the only Athenian of those
					who were engaged in public life in his time who never plotted to alter the
					government of the country by changing it to a form other than democracy; he made
					the decisions of the courts, the laws, the courts, and property, safe for all
					Athenians by the policy he pursued, and he never did anything adverse to the
					democracy by word or deed.

DECREES III 
				 Lycophron, son of Lycurgus, of the deme Butadae, presented in writing a claim
					for maintenance in the Prytaneum for himself in accordance with the gift
					presented by the people to Lycurgus of the deme Butadae. In the archonship of
						Anaxicrates, in
					the sixth prytany, that of the tribe Antiochis, Stratocles, son of Euthydemus,
					of the deme Diomeia, made the following motion: Whereas Lycurgus, son of
					Lycophron, of the deme Butadae, having inherited from early times from his
					ancestors that loyalty to the democracy which has been peculiar to his family,
					and the progenitors of Lycurgus, Lycomedes and Lycurgus, were not only honoured
					by the people during their lives, but also after their death the people granted
					them for their courage and virtue public burials in the Cerameicus; and whereas
					Lycurgus himself during his public career made many excellent laws for his
					country, and when he was treasurer of the public revenues of the city for three
					periods of four years distributed from the public revenue eighteen thousand nine
					hundred talents; and having received in trust large funds from private
					citizens, from which he made loans previously agreed upon in order to meet the
					exigencies of the city and the people, in all six hundred and fifty talents;
					and, because he was believed to have administered all these funds justly, was
					often crowned by the State; and whereas when chosen by the people he brought
					together large sums of money upon the Acropolis, providing adornment for the
					Goddess, solid gold Victories, gold and silver vessels for the processions, and
					ornaments of gold for one hundred basket-carriers, and when chosen to be in charge of
					the equipment for the war he brought to the Acropolis many pieces of armour and
					fifty thousand missiles and fitted out four hundred triremes ready to set sail,
					providing the equipment for some of them and causing some to be built from the
					beginning; and besides all this he finished the ship-sheds
					and the arsenal, which were half done when they came into his hands, and
					completed the Panathenaic stadium and erected the gymnasium at the Lyceum, and
					adorned the city with many other edifices. And when King Alexander, after
					overthrowing all Asia, assumed to give orders to all the Greeks in common and
					demanded that Lycurgus be surrendered because he was acting in opposition to
					him, the city did not surrender him in spite of fear of Alexander. And although
					he had many times submitted his accounts while the city was free and had a
					democratic form of government, he never was convicted of wrongdoing or of taking
					bribes through all his career. Therefore, that all may know that those who
					choose to act justly in public life in behalf of democracy and freedom are held
					in the highest esteem while living and receive after death enduring gratitude:
					With good Fortune: Be it resolved by the people to commend Lycurgus, son of
					Lycophron, of the deme Butadae, for his virtue and justice, and to set up a
					bronze statue of him in the Market-place, only not in any place where the law
					forbids its erection, and to grant maintenance in the Prytaneum to the eldest
					descendant of Lycurgus for all time, and that all his decrees be valid, and that
					the secretary of the people inscribe them on stone tablets arid place them on
					the Acropolis near the dedicatory offerings; and that the treasurer of the
					people give for inscribing the tablets fifty drachmas from the funds expended by
					the people for decrees.