HE that talks big and arrogantly of himself, Herculanus, is universally condemned as a troublesome and ill-bred companion. But the most, even of those who in
				words mightily declaim against him, seem to applaud him
				in their actions. Euripides could say,
				
				 
 
 If speech grew scarce, and at great rates were sold,
				 
 Commend himself what lavish fellow would?
				 
 But since the infinite treasure of the air
				 
 Praise gratis yields, none truth or falsehood spare;
				 
 Suffering no damage, though they give their ware. 
 
 
 
 Yet he often brings in his heroes intolerably boasting, and
					stuffs their most tragical adventures and passions with improper discourses of themselves. So Pindar declares,
					
					 
 
 Unseasonably to glory
					 
 Makes harmony with fury; 
 
 
 
 
 but he forbears not to extol his own raptures, which indeed,
					by the confession of all men, are worthy of the noblest
					praise. 
 But those who are crowned for mastery in the games or
					in the learned combats have others to celebrate their victories, that the people's ears be not grated with the harsh
					noises of self-applause. And Timotheus is justly censured
					as unskilfully and irregularly setting forth his conquest of
					
					 
					
					Phrynis, when he thus proudly boasted it in writing: Happy man wast thou, Timotheus, when the crier proclaimed,
					'The Milesian Timotheus hath vanquished the son of Carbo,
					the soft Ionian poet.' 
 It is true then, as Xenophon says, The most pleasant
					sound that a man can hear is his own praise in another's
					mouth; but the most odious thing unto others is a man
					commending himself. For we brand them as impudent
					who commend themselves, it becoming them to be modest
					though they were praised by others; and we account them
					unjust in arrogating that to themselves which another has
					the sole propriety of bestowing on them. Besides, if we
					then are silent, we seem either angry or envious; but if
					we second their discourse, we are presently entangled and
					forced to contribute more than we intended, speaking to
					men's faces what sounds well only behind their backs;
					and so we undertake rather the base work of drudging
					flattery than any real offices of true honor.

Yet, however, there is a time when a statesman may
				be the subject of his own discourse, and give a free relation of things he has worthily done or said, as well as
				other truths; taking care that it be not merely for favor
				or reputation, but upon some emergent occasion, and especially, when the deeds achieved by him or the parts that be
				in him be good and honest, then he is not to forbear and
				say merely that he hath done so or else much like. There
				is indeed a praise of this kind which bears very excellent and
				lovely fruit, from whose seeds arise many of the same
				species very much meliorated and improved. And therefore it is that the wise statesman seeks glory not as the
				reward or solace of his virtue, nor embraces it merely as
				the companion of his achievements, but because the being
				accounted an honorable person and gallant man affords a
				thousand opportunities of compassing many and more desirable things. For it is easy and delightful to be of use
				
				 
				
				to those who are apt to believe and love us; whereas, if a
				man lie under calumnies and suspicions, he cannot exert
				his virtue to the benefit of others without committing a kind
				of violence upon them. 
 There may also be more reasons than these, which we
					must enquire into, that, while we endeavor to avert a frivolous and nauseous applauding of ourselves, we chance not
					to omit that sort which may be truly useful.

The praise therefore is vain which a man heaps on
				himself to provoke others also to praise him, and is chiefly
				contemptible, as proceeding from an importunate and unseasonable affectation of esteem. 
 For as they who are ready to die for food are compelled
					against nature to gnaw off their own flesh, and thus put a
					miserable end to their famine; so they who mortally hunger after praise, unless some one afford them a little scantling alms of commendation, do violate the laws of decency,
					shamelessly endeavoring to supply those wants by an unnatural extolling of themselves. 
 But when they do not on the bare consideration of themselves hunt applause, but strive to obscure the worth of
					others, by fighting against their praises and opposing their
					own works and practices to theirs, they add to their vanity
					an envious and abhorred baseness. He who thrusts his
					foot into another's dance is stigmatized with a proverb as a
					ridiculous and pragmatical clown; but upon envy and jealousy to thrust ourselves between the praises of others, or
					to interrupt the same with our own self praise, is a thing
					that we ought equally to beware of. Neither should we
					allow others to praise us at such a time, but frankly yield
					the honor to those who are then celebrated, if their merit
					be real; and though the persons be vicious or unworthy,
					yet must we not take from them by setting up ourselves;
					but rather on the other hand we must reprove the unskilful applauders, and demonstrate their encomiums to be
					
					 
					
					improperly and dangerously conferred. It is plain that
					these errors must be avoided.

But self-praise is not liable to disgrace or blame when
				it is delicately handled by way of apology to remove a calumny or accusation. Thus Pericles: But ye are angry at
				me, a man inferior to none, whether it be in the understanding or interpreting of necessary things; a man who am a
				lover of my country, and above the meannesses of bribes.
				For, in speaking with this gallantry of himself, he was not
				only free from arrogance, vanity, and ambition, but he
				demonstrated the greatness and spirit of that virtue which
				could not be dejected itself, and even humbled and tamed
				the haughtiness of envy. Such men as these will hardly
				be condemned; but those who would vote against them
				are won over to their cause, do receive infinite satisfaction,
				and are agreeably inspirited with this noble boasting, especially if that bravery be steady, and the ground firm on
				which it stands. This history does frequently discover.
				For, when the Theban generals accused Pelopidas and
				Epaminondas that, the time for their office as Boeotarchs
				being expired, they did not forthwith give up their power,
				but made an incursion into Laconia and repaired and repeopled Messene, Pelopidas, submitting himself and making
				many lowly entreaties, very hardly obtained his absolution;
				but Epaminondas loftily glorying in those actions, and at
				last declaring he would willingly be put to death so that
				they would set up his accusation, Epaminondas hath wasted
					Laconia, hath settled Messene, and happily united Arcadia
					into one state, against our will, they admired him, and
				the citizens, wondering at the cheerful greatness of his
				courage, dismissed him with unspeakable pleasantness and
				satisfaction. 
 Therefore, when Agamemnon thus reproached Diomedes,
					
					 
 
 O son of Tydeus!—he whose strength could tame
					 
 The bounding steeds, in arms a mighty name,— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Canst thou remote the mingling hosts descry,
				 
 With hands inactive and a careless eye? 
 
 
 
 Sthenelus is not to be much condemned for saying,
					
					 
 
 Ourselves much greater than our ancestors
					 
 We boast; 
 
 
 
 
 for Sthenelus had not been calumniated himself, but he
					only patronized his abused friend; and so the cause excused that freedom of speech, which seemed otherwise to
					have something of the glorioso. 
 But Cicero's magnifying his diligence and prudence in
					Catiline's trial was not very pleasing to the Romans; yet
					when Scipio said, they ought not to judge Scipio, who had
					enstated them in the power of judging all men, they ascended crowned to the Capitol, and sacrificed with him.
					For Cicero was not necessitated to this, but merely spurred
					by the desire of glory; while the danger wherein Scipio
					stood delivered him from envy.

Now talking after an high and glorious manner proves
				advantageous, not only to persons in danger of the law or
				such like eminent distress, but to those also who are clouded
				in a dull series of misfortunes; and that more properly
				than when they appear splendid in the world. For what
				addition can words make to those who already seem possessed of real glory, and do lie indulging and basking in
				her beams? But those who at present are incapable of
				ambition, if they express themselves loftily, seem only to
				bear up against the storms of Fortune, to undergird the
				greatness of their souls, and to shun that pity and commiseration which supposes a shipwrecked and forlorn condition.
				As therefore those who in walking affect a stiffness of body
				and a stretched-out neck are accounted effeminate and foppish, but are commended if in fencing and fighting they
				keep themselves erect and steady; so the man grappling
				with ill fortune, if he raise himself to resist her,
				
				 
				
 		 Like some stout boxer, ready with his blow, 
 
 
 and by a bravery of speech transform himself from abject
					and miserable to bold and noble, is not to be censured as
					obstinate and audacious, but honored as invincible and great.
					So, although Homer described Patroclus in the happinesses
					of his life as smooth and without envy, yet in death he
					makes him have something of the bravo, and a soldier's
					gallant roughness:
					
					 
 
 Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might,
					 
 Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight. 
 
 
 
 
 So Phocion, though otherwise very mild, after the sentence passed on him, showed the greatness of his mind in
					many respects; particularly to one of his fellow-sufferers,
					who miserably cried out and bewailed his misfortune, What,
					says he, is it not a pleasure to thee to die with Phocion?

Further, a man of state has not less but greater liberty to speak any thing of himself when his merits are
				rewarded with injurious and unkind returns. Achilles
				usually gave the Gods their glory, and spoke modestly in
				this manner:
				
				 
 
 Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
				 
 Shall humble to the dust Troy's lofty towers. 
 
 
 
 But when he was unhandsomely reproached and aspersed
					with contumelies, he added swelling words to his anger,
					and these in his own applause:
					
					 I sacked twelve ample cities on the main; 
 
 and also these:
					
					 
 
 It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,
					 
 Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed. 
 
 
 
 
 For apologies claim a great liberty of speech and boasting,
					as considerable parts of their defence. 
 Themistocles also, having been guilty of nothing distasteful
					
					 
					
					 either in his words or actions, yet perceiving the
					Athenians glutted with him and beginning to neglect him,
					forbore not to say: Why, O ye happy people, do ye weary
					out yourselves by still receiving benefits from the same
					hands? Upon every storm you fly to the same tree for
					shelter; yet, when it is fair again, you despoil it of its leaves
					as you go away.

They therefore who are injured usually recount their
				good actions to the ingrate. And, if they also praise those
				excellences which others are pleased to condemn, they are
				not only pardonable but altogether without blame. For it
				is evident they do not reproach others, but apologize for
				themselves. 
 This gave Demosthenes a glorious freedom, yet allayed
					the offensive brightness of his own praises, which almost
					everywhere shine through his whole Oration on the Crown,
					in which he extols those embassies and decrees which were
					so much objected against him.

Not much unlike this is the insinuating delicacy of an
				antithesis, when a person, being accused for any thing as
				a crime, demonstrates its opposite to be base and vicious.
				So Lycurgus, being upbraided by the Athenians for stopping a sycophant's mouth with money, said: And what kind
				of citizen do you then take me to be, who, having so long
				managed the affairs of the republic amongst you, am at last
				found rather to have given than to have received money
				unjustly? And Cicero, Metellus objecting he had cast
				more by his evidence against them than ever he had acquitted by his pleading for them, replies: Who therefore
				will not freely declare that Cicero has more honesty and
				faith than eloquence? Many expressions of this nature
				are in Demosthenes; particularly, But who might not justly
				have slain me, if I had endeavored in word only to sully
				the honors and glorious titles which the city hath? Or,
				What, think you, would those vile fellows have said, if,
				
				 
				
				whilst I had been curiously poring on other things, the
				cities had rejected our alliance? And all his forementioned oration ingeniously dresses these antitheses and solutions of cases with the subtle ornaments of his own praise.

But this may very profitably be learned therein, that,
				delicately tempering the encomiums of his auditors with
				the things relating to himself, he secures himself from
				being liable to envy, nor becomes suspected of self-love.
				There he relates in what manner the Athenians behaved
				themselves to the Euboeans, in what manner to the Thebans, and what benefits they conferred upon those of
				Byzantium and Chersonesus; in all which he confesses his
				part was only that of their minister or steward. Thus by
				a rhetorical deceit, he finely and insensibly instils his own
				praises into his hearers, who pleasingly hang upon his
				words, and rejoice at the commemoration of those worthy
				deeds. Now this joy is immediately seconded by admiration, and admiration is succeeded by a liking and love of
				that person who so wisely administered the affairs. This
				Epaminondas seems to have considered, when reviled by
				Meneclidas, as though he had an higher opinion of himself than ever Agamemnon had. If it be so, says he,
				Thebans, 'tis you have puffed me up; you, by whose help
				alone I overthrew the Lacedaemonian empire in one day.

But since for the most part men are exceedingly
				displeased with those who are the trumpeters of their own
				fame, but if they sound forth another's, are delighted and
				give them cheerful acclamations; it is hence grown a frequent custom amongst orators, by a seasonable extolling
				those who have like purposes, actions, and manner of
				life with theirs, to assure and wheedle over the auditory
				to themselves. For the hearers know that, though the
				panegyrist solemnizes another's worth, he has yet the same
				endowments of virtue, so that his encomiums will redound
				
				 
				
				to himself. For as he who reproaches any man for
				faults of which he himself is guilty cannot but perceive
				he principally upbraids himself, so the virtuous, by giving
				applauses to the virtuous, offer their own praises to the
				apprehensive, who will presently cry out, And are not you
				one of these? Therefore Alexander honoring Hercules,
				and Androcottus again honoring Alexander, in effect proposed themselves to be in like manner honored by
				others. So Dionysius scoffing Gelon, and calling him the
				Gelos (or laughing-stock) of Sicily, was not aware that
				through envy he had happened to infringe the greatness
				of his own authority and power.

These things the man of state must know and observe. Now those who are forced upon their own praises
				are the more excusable, if they arrogate not the causes
				wholly to themselves, but ascribe them in part to Fortune
				and in part to God. Achilles therefore said:
				
				 
 
 Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
				 
 The dire destroyer to our arm has given. 
 
 
 
 
 And Timoleon did well, who erected a fane to Fortune,
					and dedicated his house to the Good Genius, to whom he
					referred the felicity of his attempts. But best of all, Python of Aenos, after he had slain Cotys, coming to Athens
					and perceiving the orators very busy in applauding him to
					the people, which displeased many and stirred them up
					to envy, thus speaks: These things, ye Athenians, some of
					the Gods have done; our hands were only the instruments
					of their work. Sylla also prevented envy by perpetually
					praising Fortune, not his own prowess; and at last surnamed himself Epaphroditus, in acknowledgment that his
					success proceeded from the care of Venus. For men will
					more readily impute a defeat to chance or the pleasure of
					some God than to the virtue of the conqueror; for the one
					they think to be a good not pertinent to the conqueror, but
					
					 
					
					the other to be a proper defect of their own, which proceedeth from themselves. The laws therefore of Zaleucus
					were received by the Locrians with the more willingness
					and delight, because he had told them Minerva constantly
					appeared to him and dictated and instructed him in those
					laws, and that they were none of them his own inventions.

This kind of excuses may be framed as convenient
				remedies or preventions when we have to do with persons
				of a difficult or envious humor. But it is not amiss to use
				some little revocations or corrections of what may seem
				spoken to our praise, before those who are of a sedate and
				composed temper. If any commend us as those who have
				learning, riches, or authority, we should hinder them from
				choosing such topics, and rather desire of them, if they
				can, to take notice of us as innocent, good, and useful.
				Thus we do not so much confer as transfer praises, and
				seem not to be puffed up with our applauders, but rather
				to be offended that they have not praised conveniently and
				for truly meritorious things. We hide also inferior with
				better qualifications; yet not as desiring to be commended,
				but as teaching to commend aright. Such forms as these
				may be referred hither: It is true, I have not walled the
				city with stones or brick; but if you will view my fortifications, you shall find armor, and horses, and confederates. 
				But more apt is that of Pericles. When his friends bewailed him in the extremities of death, they put him in
				mind of his authority and the great offices he had discharged, as also what victories, trophies, and cities he had
				left the Athenians; but he, raising himself a little, reproved
				them as fixing only upon common encomiums, and enlarging rather on those of fortune than on those of virtue,
				whereas they neglected the greatest matter, which was
				more peculiar to himself,—that he had never been the
				occasion of any Athenian's wearing black. And hence
				
				 
				
				the orator may learn, if he be a good man, to transfer the
				eulogiums of his eloquence to his virtuous life and manners; and the commander who is admired and applauded
				for his conduct and happy fortune in the wars may freely
				propose his clemency or justice as more worthy to be
				praised. Nay, further, it becomes even an emperor, upon
				a profusion of such glutting praises as flatterers are commonly guilty of, to say something of this nature:
				
				 
 
 No God am I. Why do ye equal me
				 
 Thus to th' immortal powers. 
 	 
 
 
 
 If you know me well, let my justice or temperance, my
					equanimity or humanity, be rather spoken of. For even
					envy herself can easily concede the lesser honors to him
					who refuses the greater; nor will it rob any of true encomiums, not to expect false and vain ones. Therefore
					several princes, who permitted not themselves to be called
					Gods or the offspring of the Gods, have yet assumed the
					titles Philadelphus, Philometor, Evergetes, or Theophilus;
					and were never offended when they were honored with
					those glorious yet human appellations. 
 Again, they who in their writings and sayings are absolute votaries to wisdom by no means will be called σοφοί (or
					wise men), but can presently swallow the epithet of philosophers (or lovers of wisdom), or that of proficients, or any
					other easy name which sounds not big nor exposes them to
					envy; and so they beget and preserve a good esteem. But
					your rhetorical sophisters, whilst in their orations they
					gape for the extraordinary acclamations of divine, angelical, wonderful, lose even those common ones of manly or
					pretty well.

Now as skilful painters, that they may not offend
				those that have weak eyes, allay their over-bright and
				gaudy colors by tempering them with darker; so there are
				some who will not represent their own praises altogether
				
				 
				
				glaring and immoderately splendid, but cast in some defects, some scapes or slight faults, to take away the danger
				of displeasure or envy. Epeus intolerably brags of his
				skill in boxing,
				
				 I'll crush my adversary's body, break his bones; 
 
 yet he would seem to qualify all with this,
					
					 Is't not enough that I'm in fight unskilled? 
 
 
 But, to say truth, to excuse his arrogance with so base a
					confession is ridiculous. He then who would be an exact
					man corrects himself for his forgetfulness, ignorance, ambition, or eagerness for certain knowledge and discourses.
					So does Ulysses when he says of the Sirens,
					
					 
 
 Thus the sweet charmers warbled o'er the main,
					 
 My soul takes wing to meet the heavenly strain;
					 
 I give the sign, and struggle to be free; 
 
 
 
 and again, when he sang of his visit to the Cyclops,
					
					 
 
 Their wholesome counsel rashly I declined,
					 
 Curious to view the man of monstrous kind,
					 
 And try what social rites a savage lends. 
 	 
 
 
 
 And for the most part it is a good antidote against envy,
					to mix amongst our praises those faults that are not altogether ungenerous and base. Therefore many temper
					them not only with confessions of poverty or unskilfulness,
					but even of vile descent. So Agathocles, carousing amongst
					the Sicilian youth in golden bowls very curiously wrought,
					commanded earthen pots to be brought in. See (says he)
					what diligence, laboriousness, and fortitude can do! Once
					we made muggen jugs, but now vessels of gold. For his
					original was so mean and contemptible, that it was thought
					he had served in a potter's shop who at last governed
					almost all Sicily.

These are the outward preventions or remedies
				against diseases that may arise from the speaking of one's
				
				 
				
				self. There are some others inward, which Cato has recourse to when he tells us he was envied for neglecting
				his domestic affairs and being vigilant whole nights in those
				of his country. So with this:
				
				 
 
 How shall I boast, who grew so easily,
				 
 Though mustered 'mongst the common soldiery;
				 
 Great in my fortune as the bravest be? 
 
 
 
 And this:
					
					 
 
 But I am loath to lose past labor's gains;
					 
 Nor will retreat from a fresh troop of pains. 
 
 
 
 
 For as they who obtain great possessions of houses or
					lands gratis and with little difficulty are under the eye of
					envy, but not if their purchases were troublesome and dear,
					so it is with them who arrive at honor and applause.

Well then, since it is evident we may praise ourselves not only inoffensively and without being liable to
				envy, but with great advantage too; that we may seem not
				to do this for itself, but for a further and better end, first
				consider whether it may prove for the instruction of the
				company, by exciting them to a virtuous emulation. For
				so Nestor's relation of his own achievements inflamed
				Patroclus and nine others with a vehement desire of single
				combat; and we know the counsel that brings persuasive
				deeds as well as words, a lively exemplar, and an immediate familiar incentive, insouls a man with courage,
				moves, yea, vehemently spurs him up to such a resolution
				of mind as cannot doubt the possibility and success of
				the attempt. This was the reason of that chorus in Lacedaemon consisting of boys, young men, and old men, which
				thus sang in parts:—
				
				 
 
 OLD MEN. Once we were young, and bold and strong.
				 
 Boys. And we shall be no less ere long.
				 
 YOUNG MEN. We now are such; behold us, if you will. 
 
 
 
 
 Well and politicly in this public entertainment did the
					legislator propose to the youth obvious and domestic ex
					
					 
					
					amples of such as had already performed the things he
					exhorted them to.

Moreover, it is not only available for the exciting of
				a generous emulation, but sometimes requisite for the
				silencing and taming an insolent and audacious man, to
				talk a little gloriously of one's self. As Nestor in this:
				
				 
 
 I have conversed with men more gallant far
				 
 Than you; much your superiors they in all things were,
				 
 Nor did they ever to contemn me dare. 
 
 
 
 
 And Aristotle writes to Alexander, that not only those
					who have mighty empires may think highly of themselves,
					but they also who have worthy thoughts and notions of the
					Gods. Such a remark as this is also profitable against
					enemies, and recalls the spirits:
					
					 Weak sons of misery our strength oppose. 
 
 
 And such a reflection as that of Agesilaus, who said
					concerning the king of Persia, when he heard him called
					the Great: And who is greater than I, unless he be more
					just? So Epaminondas answered the Lacedaemonians,
					when they had spun out a long accusation against the
					Thebans: I see then we have forced you out of your wonted
					humor of short speech. 
 The like to these are proper against adversaries; but
					amongst our friends and fellow-citizens a seasonable glorying is good not only to humble and throw down their
					haughtiness, but if they be fearful or astonished, to fetch
					back their courage and teach them to rally up themselves
					again. Therefore Cyrus in perils and battles talked at a
					thundering rate, but otherwise was mild and gentle in discourse. And Antigonus the Second generally was modest
					and free from blustering; but at the sea-fight at Cos,—
					one of his friends saying, See you not how much greater
					the number of the enemy's ships is than ours?—he answers,
					And for how many ships dost thou reckon me? 
 
 This Homer seems to have considered, who makes
					Ulysses, when his friends were dismayed at the noise and
					horrible waves of Charybdis, immind them of his former
					stratagems and valor:
					
					 
 
 O friends! O often tried in adverse storms!
					 
 With ills familiar in more dreadful forms!
					 
 Deep in the dire Cyclopean den you lay,
					 
 Yet safe return'd,—Ulysses led the way. 
 	 
 
 
 
 For this kind of praise is not such as the haranguers to
					the people or sophistical beggars use, nor those who affect
					popular humming and applause; but a necessary pledge
					of that courage and conduct which must be given to
					hearten up our friends. For we know that opinion and
					confidence in him whom we esteem endued with the fortitude and experience of a complete captain is, in the crisis
					of a battle, no small advantage to the obtaining of the
					day.

We have before declared the opposing of himself to
				the reputation and credit of another to be altogether unbefitting a worthy man; but where a vicious praise becomes
				hurtful and corruptive, creating an earnestness after evil
				things or an evil purpose in great matters, it is not unprofitable to refuse it; but it becomes us to direct the
				minds of the company towards better sentiments of things,
				showing them the difference. For certainly any one will
				be pleased when he sees many voluntarily abstaining from
				the vices they heard cried down and reproved; but if baseness be well accounted of, and honor be made to attend on
				him who pursues pleasure or avarice, where is the nature
				so happily strong that can resist, much less conquer, the
				temptation? Therefore a generous and discreet person
				must set himself against the praises, not of evil men, but
				of evil actions; for this kind of commendation perverts
				the judgments of men, and miserably leads them to imitate
				
				 
				
				and emulate unworthy practices as laudable. But they
				may be easily bewrayed by confronting them with opposite
				truths. Theodorus the tragedian is reported to have said
				to Satyrus the comedian, It is not so wonderful an art to
				move the theatre's laughter as to force its tears. But if
				some philosopher should have retorted, Aye; but, friend,
				it is not so fit and seemly to make men weep, as to remove
				and free them from their sorrows, it is likely by this odd
				way of commending himself he would have delighted his
				hearer, and endeavored to alter or secure his judgment.
				So Zeno knew how to speak for himself, when the great
				number of Theophrastus's scholars was opposed to the
				fewness of his, saying, His chorus is indeed greater than
				mine, but mine is sweeter. And Phocion, while Leosthenes
				yet prospered, being asked by the orators what good he
				had done the city, replies: Nothing but this, that in my
				government of you there have been no funeral orations,
				but all the deceased were buried in the sepulchres of their
				ancestors. So Crates, by way of antithesis to this epitaph
				of the glutton,
				
				 
 
 What I have eat is mine; in words my will
				 
 I've had, and of my lust have took my fill, 
 
 
 
 well opposes these,
					
					 
 
 What I have learnt is mine; I've had my thought,
					 
 And me the Muses noble truths have taught. 
 
 
 
 This kind of praise is amiable and advantageous, teaching to admire and love convenient and profitable things
					instead of the superfluous and vain. Thus much for the
					stating of the question, in what cases and how far self-praise may be inoffensive.

Now the order of the discourse requires to show
				how an uncomely and unseasonable affectation of praise
				may be avoided. Discourse of a man's self usually sallies
				from self-love, as from its fort, and is there observed to
				lay wait, even in those who are vulgarly thought free
				
				 
				
				enough from ambition. Therefore, as it is one of the
				rules of health to avoid dangerous and unwholesome
				places, or being in them to take the greater care, so
				ought there to be a like rule concerning converse and
				speaking of one's self. For this kind of talk has slippery occasions, into which we unawares and indiscernible
				are apt to fall. 
 For first (as is above said), ambition usually intrudes
					into the praises of others with some flourishing remarks
					to adorn herself. For let a person be commended by his
					equal or inferior, the mind of the ambitious is tickled and
					rubbed at the hearing of his praise, and immediately he
					is hurried by an intemperate desire and precipitation after
					the like; as the appetite of the hungry is sharpened by
					seeing others eat.

In the second place, the story of men's prosperous
				actions naturally carries them into the humor of boasting;
				and joy so far transports them, that they swell with their
				own words when they would give you a relation of their
				victories or their success in the business of the state, or
				of their other publicly applauded actions or orations, and
				find it difficult to contain themselves and preserve a mean.
				In which kind of error it is observable that soldiers and
				mariners are most entangled. Nor is it infrequent with
				those who return from the government of provinces and
				the management of great affairs. Such as these, when
				mention is once made of illustrious and royal personages,
				presently thrust in some eulogies of themselves, as proceeding from the favor and kind opinion of those princes;
				and then they fancy they seem not at all to have praised
				themselves, but to have given only a bare account what
				great men have said honorably of them. So another sort,
				little different from these, think they are not discerned
				when they tell you all the familiarities of kings and emperors with them and their particular applying themselves
				
				 
				
				to them in discourse, and appear to recount them, not as
				thereby intending their own honor, but as bringing in considerable evidences of singular affability and humanity in
				persons so exceeding great. 
 We see then what reason we have to look narrowly to
					ourselves, that, whilst we confer praises on others, we
					give no ground for suspicion that we make them but the
					vehicles of our own, and that, in pretending to celebrate
						Patroclus, under his name we mean romantically ourselves.

Further, that kind of discourse which consists in
				dispraising and finding fault is dangerous, and yields opportunity to those that watch it for the magnifying their
				own little worth. Of this old men are inclinable to be
				guilty, when, by chastising and debasing others for their
				vices, they exalt themselves as wonderfully great in the
				opposite virtues. Indeed to these there must be a very
				large concession, if they be reverend not only in age, but
				in virtue and place; for it is not altogether an unprofitable way, since it may sometimes create an extraordinary
				zeal and emulation of honor in those who are thus spurred
				up. But otherwise that sort of humor is carefully to be
				shunned; for reproof is often bitter, and wants a great
				deal of caution to sweeten and correct it. Now this is
				not done by the tempering our own praises with the reprehension of another; for he is an unworthy and odious
				fellow who seeks his own credit through any man's disgrace, basely endeavoring to build a slight reputation of
				his virtue upon the discovery of another's crimes.

Lastly, as they who are naturally inclined to a dangerous sort of laughter,—which is a kind of violent passion or disease,—must preserve especially the smooth
				parts of the body from tickling incentives, which cause
				these parts to yield and relent, thus provoking the passion; so they whose minds are soft and propense to the
				desires of reputation must carefully beware that they be
				
				 
				
				not precipitated by the ticklings of another's praises into
				a vaporing of themselves. They ought rather to blush,
				if they hear themselves commended, and not put on a
				brazen face. They ought modestly and handsomely to
				reprove their applauders as having honored them too
				much, and not chide them for having been too sparing in
				their praise. Yet in this many offend, putting those who
				speak advantageously of them in mind of more things of
				the same nature; endeavoring to make a huge heap of
				creditable actions, till by what they themselves add they
				spoil all that their friends have conferred to the promoting their esteem. 
 Some there are who flatter themselves, till they are stupidly puffed up; others allure a man to talk of himself,
					and take him by casting some little gilded temptation in
					his way; and another sort for a little sport will be putting
					questions, as those in Menander to the silly braggadocio
					soldier:
					
					 
 
 How did you get this wound?
					 
 By a furious dart.
					 
 For heaven's sake, how?
					 
 As from my scaling ladder
					 
 I mounted the proud walls. See here! Behold!
					 
 Then I proceed to show my wound
					 
 With earnest look; but they spoiled all with laughter.

We must be watchful in all these cases, that we
				neither of ourselves drop into our own inconvenient
				praises, nor be hooked into them by others. Now the
				best and most certain way of security is to look back
				upon such as we can remember guilty of this fault, and
				to consider how absurd and ugly it is accounted by all
				men, and that hardly any thing is in converse a greater
				disturbance than this. 
 Hence it is that, though there be no other quality in
					such persons unpleasing, yet, as if Nature had taught us
					to abhor and fly it, we hasten out to get a little fresh air;
					
					 
					
					and even the very parasite and indigent flatterers are uneasy, when the wealthy and great men by whose scraps
					they live begin to admire and extol themselves; nay,
					they give out that they pay the greatest portion of the
					shot, when they must give ear to such vanities. Therefore he in Menander cries out,
					
					 
 
 They kill me—I am a macerated guest—
					 
 With their wise sayings and their soldier's brags;
					 
 How base these gloriosos are! 
 
 
 
 But these faults are not only to be objected against
					common soldiers and upstarts who detain others with
					gaudy and proud relations of their own actions, but also
					against sophists, philosophers, and commanders who grow
					full of themselves and talk at a fastuous rate. Therefore
					it is fit we still remember that another's dispraise always
					accompanies the indiscreet praises of ourselves; that the
					end of vain-glory is disgrace; and that, as Demosthenes
					tells us, the company will both be offended and judge
					otherwise of us than we would have them. Let us then
					forbear to talk of ourselves, unless the profit that we or
					our hearers may thence probably reap be considerably
					great.