HERMES 
 What ails you, Zeus, in lone soliloquy 
 To pace about all pale and scholar-like ? 
 Confide in me, take me to ease your toils : 
 Scorn not the nonsense of a serving-man. 
 ATHENA 
 Yea, thou sire of us all, son of Cronus, supreme among rulers, 
 Here at thy knees I beseech it, the grey-eyed Tritogeneia : 
 Speak thy thought, let it not lie hid in thy mind, let us know it. 
 What is the care that consumeth thy heart and thy soul with its gnawing? 
 Wherefore thy deep, deep groans, and the pallor that preys on thy features ? 
 ZEUS 
 There’s nothing dreadful to express in speech, 
 No cruel hap, no stage catastrophe 
 That I do not surpass a dozen lines! 
 ATHENA 
 Apollo ! what a prelude to your speech ! 

 

 ZEUS 
 O utter vile hell-spawn of mother earth, 
 And thou, Prometheus—thou hast hurt me sore! 
 ATHENA 
 What isit? None will hear thee but thy kin. 
 ZEUS 
 Thundering stroke of my whizzing bolt, what a deed shalt thou do me! 
 HERA 
Lull your anger to sleep, Zeus, seeing that I’m no
hand either at comedy or at epic like these two,
nor have I swallowed Euripides whole so as to be
able to play up to you in your tragedy réle.

Do you
suppose we don’t know the reason of your. anguish ?
 
 ZEUS 
 You know not: otherwise you ‘Id shriek and 
scream. 
 HERA 
I know that the sum and substance of your troubles
is a love-affair; I don’t shriek and scream, though,
because I am used to it, as you have already affronted
me many a time in this way. It is likely that you
have found another Danae or Semele or Europa and
are plagued by love, and that you are thinking
of turning into a bull or a satyr or a shower of gold,
to fall down through the roof into the lap of your
sweetheart, for these symptoms—groans and_tears
and paleness—belong to nothing but love.
 
 ZEUS 
You simple creature, to think that our circumstances permit of love-making and such pastimes !

 

 HERA 
Well, if that isn’t it, what else is plaguing you ?
Aren’t you Zeus?

ZEUS 
Why, Hera, the circumstances of the gods are as
bad as they can be, and as the saying goes, it rests
on the edge of a razor whether we are still to be
honoured and have our due on earth or are actually
to be ignored completely and count for nothing.
 
 HERA 
It can’t be that the earth has once more given
birth to giants, or that the Titans have burst their
bonds and overpowered their guard, and are once
more taking up arms against us?
 
 ZEUS 
 Take heart: the gods have naught to fear from
Hell. 
 HERA 
Then what else that is terrible can happen?
Unless something of that sort is worrying you, I
don’t see why you should behave in our presence
like a Polus or an Aristodemus instead of Zeus.

ZEUS 
Why, Hera, Timocles the Stoic and Damis the
Epicurean had a dispute about Providence yesterday
(I don’t know how the discussion began) in the
presence of a great many men of high standing, and
it was that fact that annoyed me most. Damis
asserted that gods did not even exist, to say nothing
of overseeing or directing events, whereas Timocles,
good soul that he is, tried to take our part. Then a

 

large crowd collected and they did not finish the
conversation ; they broke up after agreeing to finish
the discussion another day, and now everybody is in
suspense to see which will get the better of it and
appear to have more truth on his side of the
argument. You see the danger, don’t you? We
are in a tight place, for our interests are staked
on a single man, and there are only two things
that can happen—we must either be thrust aside
in case they conclude that we are nothing but
names, or else be honoured as before if Timocles
gets the better of it in the argument.

HERA 
A dreadful situation in all conscience and it wasn’t
for nothing, Zeus, that you ranted over it.
 
 ZEUS 
And you supposed I was thinking of some Danaé
or Antiope in all this confusion! Come now, Hermes
and Hera and Athena, what can we do? You too,
you know, must do your share of the planning.
 
 HERMES 
Ihold the question should be laid before the
people ; let’s call a meeting.
 
 HERA 
I think the same as he does.
 
 ATHENA 
But I think differently, father. Let’s not stir
Heaven all up and show that you are upset over the
business: manage it yourself in such a way that
Timocles will win in the argument and Damis will
be laughed to scorn and abandon the field.


 

 HERMES 
But people won’t fail to know of it, Zeus, as the
philosophers are to have their dispute in public, and
they will think you a tyrant if you don't call everyone into counsel on such important matters of
common concern to all.

ZEUS 
Well then, make a proclamation and let everyone
come; you are right in what you say.
 
 HERMES 
Hear ye, gods, assemble in meeting! Don’t delay !
Assemble one and all! Come! We are to meet
about important matters.
 
 ZEUS 
Is that the sort of proclamation you make, Hermes,
so bald and simple and prosaic, and that too when
you are calling them together on business of the
greatest importance?
 
 HERMES 
Why, how do you want me to do it, Zeus?
 
 ZEUS 
How do I want you to do it? Ennoble your
proclamation, I tell you, with metre and_highsounding, poetical words, so that they may be more
eager to assemble.
 


 

 HERMES 
Yes, but that, Zeus, is the business of epic poets
and reciters, and I am not a bit of a poet, so that I
shall ruin the proclamation by making my lines too
long or too short and it will be a laughing-stock to
them because of the limping verses. In fact I see
that even Apollo gets laughed at for some of his
oracles, although they are generally so beclouded

 

with obscurity that those who hear them don’t have
much chance to examine their metres.
 
 ZEUS 
Well then, Hermes, put into the proclamation a lot
of the verses which Homer used in calling us together; of course you remember them.
 
 HERMES 
Not at all as distinctly and readily as I might, but
I'll have a try at it anyway :
 Never a man of the gods bide away nor ever a woman, 
 Never a stream stay at home save only the river of Ocean, 
 Never a Nymph; to the palace of Zeus you're to come in a body, 
 There to confer. I bid all, whether feasters on hecatombs famous, 
 Whether the class you belong to be middle or lowest, or even 
 Nameless you sit beside altars that yield ye no savoury odours.

ZEUS 
Splendid, Hermes! an excellent proclamation,
that. Indeed, they are coming together already, so
take them in charge and seat each of them in his
proper place according to his material and workmanhip, those of gold in the front row, then next to
hem those of silver, then all those of ivory, then
hose of bronze or stone, and among the latter let
he gods made by Phidias or Alcamenes or Myron
t Euphranor or such artists have precedence and
et these vulgar, inartistic fellows huddle together

 

in silence apart from the rest and just fill out the
quorum.

 
 HERMES 
It shall be done, and they shall be seated properly ; but I had better find out about this; if one
of them is of gold and very heavy, yet not precise
in workmanship but quite ordinary and misshapen,
is he to sit in front of the bronzes of Myron and
Polyclitus and the marbles of Phidias and Alcamenes,
or is precedence to be given to the art?
 
 ZEUS 
It ought to be that way, but gold must have precedence all the same.

HERMES 
I understand : you tell me to seat them in order
of wealth, not in order of merit; by valuation.
Come to the front seats, then, you of gold.

It is
likely, Zeus, that none but foreigners will occupy
the front row, for as to the Greeks you yourself see
what they are like, attractive, to be sure, and good
looking and artistically made, but all of marble or
bronze, nevertheless, or at most in the case of the
very richest, of ivory with just a little gleam of
gold, merely to the extent of being superficially
tinged and brightened, within while even these are
of wood and shelter whole droves of mice that keep
court inside. But Bendis here and Anubis over
there and Attis beside him and Mithras and Men
are of solid gold and heavy and very valuable
indeed.

POSEIDON 
Now why is it right, Hermes, for this dog-faced
fellow from Egypt to sit in front of me when I am
Poseidon?
 
 HERMES 
That’s all very well, but Lysippus made you of
bronze and a pauper because the Corinthians had no
gold at that time, while this fellow is richer than you
are by mines-full. So you must put up with being
thrust aside and not be angry if one who has such
a snout of gold is preferred before you.

APHRODITE 
Well then, Hermes, take me and seat me in the
front row somewhere, for I am golden.
 
 HERMES 
Not as far as I can see, Aphrodite: unless I am
stone blind, you are of white marble, quarried on
Pentelicus, no doubt, and then, the plan having approved itself to Praxiteles, turned iuto Aphrodite
and put into the care of the Cnidians.
 
 APHRODITE 
But I'll prove it to you by a competent witness,
Homer, who says all up and down his lays that I
am “golden Aphrodite.”
 
 HERMES 
Yes, and the same man said that Apollo was rich
in gold and wealthy, but now you'll see that he too
is sitting somewhere among the middle class, uncrowned by the pirates and robbed of the pegs of
his lyre. So be content yourself if you are not quite
classed with the common herd in the meeting.

COLOSSUS OF RHODES 
But who would make bold to rival me, when I ain
Helius and so great in size? If the Rhodians had
not wanted to make me monstrous and enormous,
they might have made sixteen gods of gold at the
same expense, so in virtue of this I should be
considered more valuable. And I have art and precision of workmanship, too, for all my great size.
 
 HERMES 
What’s to be done, Zeus? This is a hard
question to decide, at least for me; for if I should
consider the material, he is only bronze, but if I compute how many thousands it cost to cast him, he
would be more than a millionaire.
 
 ZEUS 
Oh, why had he to turn up to disparage the
smallness of the others and to disarrange the
seating? See here, most puissant of Rhodians,
however much you may deserve precedence over
those of gold, how can you sit in the front row
unless everyone else is to be obliged to stand up so
that you alone can sit down, occupying the whole
Pnyx with one of your hams? Therefore you had
better stand up during the meeting and stoop over
the assembly.

HERMES 
Here is still another question that is hard to solve.
Both of them are of bronze and of the same artistic
merit, each being by Lysippus, and what is more
they are equals in point of family, for both are sons
of Zeus—I mean Dionysus here and Heracles.
Which of them has precedence? Vor they are quarrelling, as you gee.

 

 ZEUS 
We are wasting time, Hermes, when we should
have been holding our meeting long ago, so for the
present let them sit promiscuously wherever each
wishes; some other day we shall call a meeting
about this, and I shall then decide what order of
precedence should be fixed in their case.

HERMES 
Heracles ! what a row they are making with their
usual daily shouts: “Give us our shares!”’ “Where
is the nectar?” “The ambrosia is all gone!”
"Where are the hecatombs?” “Victims in common !”’
 
 ZEUS 
Hush them up, Hermes, so that they may learn
why they were called together, as soon as they have
stopped this nonsense.
 
 HERMES 
Not all of them understand Greek, Zeus, and I
am no polyglot, to make a proclamation that Scyths
and Persians and Thracians and Celts can understand. I had better sign to them with my hand,
I think, and make them keep still.
 
 ZEUS 
Do so.

HERMES 
Good! There you have them, quieter than the
sophists. It is time to make your speech, then.
Come, come, they have been gazing at you this long
time, waiting to see what in the world you are going
to say.
 
 ZEUS 
Well, Hermes, I need not hesitate to tell you how

 

I feel, since you are my son. You know how confident and loud-spoken I always was in our meetings ?
 
 HERMES 
Yes, and I used to be frightened when I heard
you making a speech, above all when you threatened
to pull up the earth and the sea from their
foundations, with the gods to boot, letting down
that cord of gold. 
 ZEUS 
But now, my boy, I don’t know whether because
of the greatness of the impending disasters or
because of the number of those present (for the
meeting is packed with gods, as you see), I am
confused in the head and trembly and my tongue
seems to be tied ; and what is strangest of all, I have
forgotten the introduction to the whole matter, which
I prepared in order that my beginning might present
them “a countenance most fair.” 
 HERMES 
You have spoiled everything, Zeus. They are
suspicious of your silence and expect to hear
about some extraordinary disaster because you are
delaying.
 
 ZEUS 
Then do you want me to recite them my famous
Homeric introduction ?
 
 HERMES 
Which one?
 
 ZEUS 
"Hark to me, all of the gods, and all the goddesses
likewise.” 

 

 HERMES 
Tut, tut! you gave ws enough of your parodies
in the beginning. If you wish, however, you can
stop your tiresome versification and deliver one of
Demosthenes’ speeches against Philip, any one you
choose, with but little modification. Indeed, that
is the way most people make speeches nowadays.
 
 ZEUS 
Good! That is a short cut to speechmaking and a
timely help to anyone who doesn’t know what to
say.

HERMES 
Do begin, then.
 
 ZEUS 
Gentlemen of Heaven, in preference to great
riches you would choose, I am sure, to learn why it
is that you are now assembled. This being so, it
behoves you to give my words an attentive hearing.
The present crisis, gods, all but breaks out in
speech and says that we must grapple stoutly with
the issues of the day, but we, it seems to me, are
treating them with great indifference. I now
Jesire—my Demosthenes is running short, you see
—to tell you plainly what it was that disturbed me
nd mmade me call the meeting.
Yesterday, as you know, when Mnesitheus the
1ip-captain made the offering for the deliverance of
's slip, which came near being lost off Caphereus,
e banqueted at Piraeus, those of us whom
nesitheus asked to the sacrifice. Then, after the
atioms, you all went in different directions, wherpy each of you thought fit, but I myself, as it was
Every late, went up to town to take my evening

 

stroll in the Potters’ Quarter, reflecting as I went
upon the stinginess of Mnesitheus. ‘To feast sixteen gods he had sacrificed only a cock, and a
wheezy old cock at that, and four cakes of frankincense that were thoroughly well mildewed, so that
they went right out on the coals and didn’t even
give off enough smoke to smell with the tip of your
nose ; and yet he had promised whole herds of cattle
while the ship was drifting on the rock and was
inside the ledges.

But when, thus reflecting, I had reached the
Painted Porch, I saw a great number of men gathered
together, some inside, in the porch itself, a number
in the court, and one or two sitting on the seats
bawling and straining their lungs. Guessing (as was
indeed the case) that they were philosophers of the
disputatious order, I decided to stop and hear what
they were saying, and as I happened to be wrapped
im one of my thick clouds, I dressed myself after
their style and lengthened my beard with a pull,
making myself very like a philosopher; then,
elbowing the rabble aside, I went in without being
recognized. I found the Epicurean Damis, that sly
rogue, and Timocles the Stoic, the best man in the
world, disputing madly : at least Timocles was sweating and had worn his voice out with shouting, while
Damnis with his sardonic laughter was making him
more and more excited.

Their whole discussion was about us. That confounded Damis asserted that we do not exercise any
providence in behalf of men and do not oversee
what goes on among them, saying nothing less than
that we do not exist at all (for that is of course what


 

his argument implied), and there were some who
applauded him. The other, however, I mean
Timocles, was on our side and fought for us and got
angry and took our part in every way, praising our
management and telling how we govern and direct
everything in the appropriate order and system ; and
he too had some who applauded him. But finally he
grew tired and began to speak badly and the crowd
began to turn admiring eyes on Damis; so, seeing
the danger, I ordered night to close in and break up
the conference. They went away, therefore, after
agreeing to carry the dispute to a conclusion the
next day, and I myself, going along with the crowd,
overheard them praising Damis’ views on their way
home and even then far preferring his side: there
were some, however, who recommended them not to
condemn the other side in advance but to wait and
see what Timocles would say the next day.

That is why I called you together, gods, and it is
no trivial reason if you consider that all our honour
and glory and revenue comes from men, and if they
are convinced either that there are no gods at all
or that if there are they have no thought of men,
we shall be without sacrifices, without presents and
without honours on earth and shall sit idle in Heaven
in the grip of famine, choused out of our old-time
feasts and celebrations and games and sacrifices and
vigils and processions. Such being the issue, I say
that all must try to think out something to save the
situation for us, so that Timocles will win and be
thought to have the truth on his side of the argument and Damis will be laughed to scorn by the
audience: for I have very little confidence that

 

Timocles will win by himself if he has not our
backing. Therefore make your lawful proclamation,
Hermes, so that they may arise and give counsel.
 
 HERMES 
Hark! Hush! No noise! Who of the gods in
full standing that have the right to speak wants to
do so? What’s this? Nobody arises? Are you
dumfounded by the greatness of the issues presented,
that you hold your tongues?

MOMUS 
 Marry, you others may all into water and earth be
converted; 
 Iliad7, 99. 

but as for me, if I were privileged to speak frankly,
I would have a great deal to say.
 
 ZEUS 
Speak, Momus, with full confidence, for it is clear
that your frankness will be intended for our common
good.
 
 MOMUS 
Well then, listen, gods, to what comes straight
from the heart, as the saying goes. I quite expected
that we should wind up in this helpless plight and
that we should have a great crop of sophists like
this, who get from us ourselves the justification for
their temerity; and I vow by Themis that it is not
right to be angry either at Epicurus or at his
associates and successors in doctrine if they have
formed such an idea of us. Why, what could one
expect them to think when they see so much confusion in life, and see that the good men among
them are neglected and waste away in poverty and

 

illness and bondage while scoundrelly, pestilential
fellows are highly honoured and have enormous
wealth and lord it over their betters, and that templerobbers are not punished but escape, while men who
are guiltless of all wrong-dving sometimes die by the
cross or the scourge ?

It is natural, then, that on seeing this they
think of us as if we were nothing at all, especially
when they hear the oracles saying that on crossing
the Halys somebody will destroy a great kingdom,
without indicating whether he will destroy his own
or that of the enemy ; and again

 “Glorious Salamis, death shalt thou bring to the
children of women, 
 Herod. 7, 140 ff. 

for surely both Persians and Greeks were the
children of women! And when the reciters tell
them that we fall in love and get wounded and are
thrown into chains and become slaves and quarrel
among ourselves and have a thousand cares, and
all this in spite of our claim to be blissful and
deathless, are they not justified in laughing at us and
holding us in no esteem? We, however, are vexed
if any humans not wholly without wits criticize all
this and reject our providence, when we ought to be
glad if any of them continue to sacrifice to us,
offending as we do.

I beg you here and now, Zeus, as we are alone and
there is no man in our gathering except Heracles
and Dionysus and Ganymede and Asclepius, these
naturalized aliens—answer me truly, have you ever
had enough regard for those on earth to find out

 

who are the good among them and who are the bad?
No, you can’t say that you have! In fact, if
Theseus on his way from Troezen to Athens had
not incidentally done away with the marauders, as
far as you and your providence are concerned nothing
would hinder Sciron and Pityocamptes and Cereyon
and the rest of them from continuing to live in
luxury by slaughtering wayfarers. Andif Eurystheus,
an upright man, full of providence, had not out of
the love he bore his fellow men looked into the
conditions everywhere and sent out this servant
of his, a hard-working fellow eager for tasks, you,
Zeus, would have paid little heed to the Hydra and
the Stymphalian birds and the Thracian mares and
the insolence and wantonness of the Centaurs.

If you would have me speak the truth, we sit
here considering just one question, whether anybody is slaying victims and burning incense at our
altars ; everything else drifts with the current, swept
aimlessly along. Therefore we are getting and
shall continue to get no more than we deserve when
men gradually begin to crane their necks upward and
find out that it does them no good to sacrifice to us
and hold processions. Then in a little while you
shall see the Epicuruses and Metrodoruses and
Damises laughing at us, and our pleaders overpowered and silenced by them. So it is for the rest
of you to check and remedy all this, you who carried
it so far. To me, being only Momus, it does not
make much difference if I ain to be unhonoured, for
even in bygone days I was not one of those in
honour, while you are still fortunate and enjoy your
sacrifices.

ZEUS 
Let us ignore this fellow’s nonsense, gods; he is
always harsh and fault-finding. As that wonderful
man Demosthenes says, to reproach and criticize and
find fault is easy and anyone can do it, but to advise
how a situation. may be improved requires a really
wise counsellor; and this is what the rest of you
will do, I am very sure, even if Momus says nothing.

POSEIDON 
For my part I am pretty much subaqueous, as you
know, and live by myself in the depths, doing my
best to rescue sailors, speed vessels on their course
and calm the winds. Nevertheless I am interested
in matters here too, and I say that this Damis should
be put out of the way before he enters the dispute,
either with a thunderbolt or by some other means,
for fear that he may get the better of it in the
argument ; for you say, Zeus, that he is a plausible
fellow. At the same time we'll show them how we
punish people who say such things against us.

ZEUS 
Are you joking, Poseidon, or have you completely
forgotten that nothing of the sort is in our power,
but the Fates decide by their spinning that one man
is to die by a thunderbolt, another by the sword
and another by fever or consumption? If it lay in
my power, do you suppose I would have let the
temple-robbers get away from Olympia the other
day unscathed by my thunderbolt, when they had
shorn off two of my curls weighing six pounds apiece?
Or would you yourself at Geraestus have allowed the
fisherman from Oreus to filch your trident? Besides,

 

it will look as if we were getting angry because we
have been injured, and as if we feared the arguments of Damis and were making away with him
for that reason, without waiting for him to be put
to the proof by Timocles. Shall we not seem, then,
to be winning by default if we win in that way?
 
 POSEIDON 
Why, I supposed I had thought of a short cut to
victory ?
 
 ZEUS 
Avast ! a stockfish idea, Poseidon, downright stupid,
to make away with your adversary in advance so that
he may die undefeated, leaving the question still in
dispute and unsettled !
 
 POSEIDON 
Well, then, the rest of you think of something
else that is better, since you relegate my ideas to the
stockfish in that fashion.

APOLLO 
If we young fellows without beards were permitted
by law to take the floor, perhaps I might have made
some contribution to the debate.
 
 MOMUS 
In the first place, Apollo, the debate is on such
great issues that the right to speak does not go by
age but is open to all alike ; for it would be delicious
if when we were in direst danger we quibbled about
our rights under the law. Secondly, according to law _
you are already fully entitled to the floor, for you
came of age long ago and are registered in the list
of the Twelve Gods and almost were a member of
the council in the days of Cronus. So don’t play
the boy with us: say what you think boldly, and

 

don’t be sensitive about speaking without a beard
when you have such a long-bearded, hairy-faced son
in Asclepius. Besides, it would be in order for you
to show your wisdom now or never, unless you sit
on Helicon and talk philosophy with the Muses for
nothing.
 
 APOLLO 
But it is not for you to give such permission,
Momus; it is for Zeus, and if he lets me perhaps
I may say something not without sweetness and
light and worthy of my study on Helicon.
 
 ZEUS 
Speak, my boy: I give you permission.

APOLLO 
This Timocles is an upright, God-fearing man and
he is thoroughly up in the Stoic doctrines, so that
he gives lessons to many of the young men
-and collects large fees for it, being very plausible
when he disputes privately with his pupils; but he
utterly lacks the courage to speak before a crowd
and his language is vulgar and half-foreign, so that
he gets laughed at for that reason when he appears
in public, for he does not talk fluently but stammers
and gets confused, especially when in spite of these
faults he wants to make a show of fine language.
His intellect, to be sure, is exceedingly keen and
subtle, as people say who know more than I about
Stoicism, but in lecturing and expounding he weakens
and obscures his points by his incapacity, not making
his meaning clear but presenting propositions that
are like riddles and returning answers that are still
more unintelligible; hence the others failing to com-


 

prehend, laugh at him. But it is essential to speak
clearly, I think, and beyond all else to take great
pains to be understood by the hearers.

MOMUS 
You were right, Apollo, in praising people who
speak clearly, even though you yourself do not do
it at all, for in your oracles you are ambiguous and
riddling and you unconcernedly toss most of them
into the debatable ground so that your hearers need
another Apollo to interpret them. But what do
you advise as the next step, what remedy for
Timocles’ helplessness in debate ?

APOLLO 
To give him a spokesman if possible, Momus, one of
those eloquent chaps who will say fittingly whatever
Timocles thinks of and suggests.
 

 MOMUS 
Truly a puerile suggestion which shows that you
still need a tutor, that we should bring a spokesman
into a meeting of philosophers to interpret the
opinions of Timocles to the company, and that Damis
should speak in his own person and unaided while
the other, making use of a proxy, privately whispers
his ideas into his ear and the proxy does the speaking,
perhaps without even understanding what he hears,
Wouldn’t that be fun for the crowd! No, let’s
think of some other way to manage this thing.

But
as for you, my admirable friend, since you claim to
be a prophet and have collected large fees for such
work, even to the extent of getting ingots of gold
once upon a time, why do you not give us a timely
display of your skill by foretelling which of the

 

sophists will win in the argument? Of course you
know what the outcome will be, if you are a
prophet:
 
 APOLLO 
How can I do that, Momus, when we have no
tripod here, and no incense or prophetic spring like
Castaly ?
 
 MOMUS 
There now! you dodge the test when it comes to
the pinch.
 
 ZEUS 
Speak up, my boy, all the same, and don’t give
this libeller a chance to malign and insult your profession by saying that it all depends on a tripod and
water and incense, so that if you didn’t have those
things you would be deprived of your skill.
 
 APOLLO 
It would be better, father, to do such business at
Delphi or Colophon where I have all the necessaries
at hand, in the usual way. However, even thus
devoid of them and unequipped, I will try to foretell
whose the victory shall be: you will bear with me if
my verses are lame.
 
 MOMUS 
Do speak ; but let it be clear, and not itself in
need of a spokesman or an interpreter. It is not
now a question of lamb and turtle cooking together
in Lydia, but you know what the debate is about.
 
 ZEUS 
What in the world are you going to say, my boy?
These preliminaries to your oracle are terrifying in
themselves; your colour is changed, your eyes are
rolling, your hair stands on end, your movements are

 

frenzied, and in a word everything about you
suggests demoniacal possession and gooseflesh and
mysteries.

APOLLO 
 Hark to the words of the prophet, oracular words of Apollo, 
 Touching the shivery strife in which heroes are facing each other. 
 Loudly they shout in the battle, and fast-flying words are their weapons ; 
 Many a blow while the hisses of conflict are ebbing and flowing 
 This way and that shall be dealt on the crest of the plowtail stubborn ; 
 Yet when the hook-taloned vulture the grasshopper grips in his clutches, 
 Then shall the rainbearing crows make an end of their cawing forever : 
 Vict’ry shall go to the mules, and the ass will rejoice in his offspring ! 
 ZEUS 
What are you guffawing about, Momus? Surely
there is nothing to laugh at in the situation we are
facing. Stop, hang you! You'll choke yourself to
death with your laughing.
 
 MOMUS 
How can I, Zeus, when the oracle is so clear and
manifest ?
 
 ZEUS 
Well then, suppose you tell us what in the world
it means.
 
 MOMUS 
It is quite manifest, so that we shan’t need a
Themistocles. . The prophecy says as plainly as you

 

please that this fellow is a humbug and that you who
believe in him are pack-asses and mules, without
as much sense as grasshoppers.

HERACLES 
As for me, father, though I am but an alien I.shall
not hesitate to say what I think. When they have
met and are disputing, if Timocles gets the better
of it, let’s allow the discussion about us to proceed ;
but if it turns out at all adversely, in that case, if
you approve, I myself will at once shake the porch
and throw it down on Damis, so that he may not
affront us, confound him!
 
 ZEUS 
In the name of Heracles! that was a loutish,
horribly Boeotian thing you said, Heracles, to involve
so many honest men in the destruction of a single
rascal, and the porch too, with its Marathon and
Miltiades and Cynegirus! If they should collapse
how could the orators orate any more? They would
be robbed of their principal topic for speeches. 
Moreover, although while you were alive you could
no doubt have done something of the sort, since you
have become a god you have found out, I suppose,
that only the Fates can do such things; and that we
have no part in them.
 
 HERACLES 
So when I killed the lion or the Hydra, the
Fates did it through my agency?
 
 ZEUS 
Why, certainly!

 

 HERACLES 
And now, in case anyone affronts me by robbing
my temple or upsetting my image, can’t I exterminate him unless it was long ago settled that way
by the Fates?
 
 ZEUS 
No, not by any means.
 
 HERACLES 
Then hear me frankly, Zeus, for as the comic
poet puts it,
 I'm but a boor and call a spade a spade. 
 
If that is the way things stand here with you, I
shall say good-bye forever to the honours here
and the odour of sacrifice and the blood of victims
and go down to Hell, where with my bow uncascd
I can at least frighten the ghosts of the animals I
have slain.
 
 ZEUS 
Bravo! testimony from the inside, as the saying
goes. Really you would have done us a great
service if you had given Damis a hint to say
that.

But who is this coming up in hot haste, the
one of bronze, with the fine tooling and the fine
contours, with his hair tied up in the old-fashioned
way ? Oh yes, it is your brother, Hermes, the
one of the public square, beside the Painted Porch. 
At any rate he is all covered with pitch from being
cast every day by the sculptors. My lad, what brings

 

you here at a run? Do you bring us news from
earth, by any chance?
 
 HERMAGORAS 
Important news, Zeus, that requires unlimited
attention.
 
 ZEUS 
Tell me whether we have overlooked anything
else in the way of conspiracy.

 
 HERMAGORAS 
 
 It fell just now that they who work in bronze 
 Had smeared me o’er with pitch on breast and back ; 
 A funny corslet round my body hung, 
 Conformed by imitative cleverness 
 To take the full impression of the bronze. 
 I saw a crowd advancing with a pair 
 Of sallow bawlers, warriors with words, 
 Hight Damis, one— 
 


 ZEUS 
Leave off your bombast, my good Hermagoras; I
know the men you mean. But tell me whether they
have been in action long.
 
 HERMAGORAS 
Not very; they were still skirmishing, slinging
abuse at each other at long range.

ZEUS 
Then what else remains to be done, gods, except
to stoop over and listen to them? So let the Hours
remove the bar now, drive the clouds away and throw
open the gates of Heaven.

 

Heracles! what a crowd

 

has come together to listen! ‘Timocles himself does
not please me at all, for he is trembling and confused.
The fellow will spoil it all to-day ; in fact, it is clear
that he won’t even be able to square off at Danis.
But let’s do the very utmost that we can and pray
for him,
Silently, each to himself, so that Damis may not be
the wiser.

TIMOCLES 
Damis, you sacrilegious wretch, why do you say
that the gods do not exist and do not show providence in behalf of men?
 
 DAMIS 
No, you tell me first what reason you have for
believing that they do exist.
 
 TIMOCLES 
No, you tell me, you miscreant !
 
 DAMIS 
No, you!
 
 ZEUS 
So far our man is much better and more noisy in
his bullying. Good, Timocles! Pile on your abuse ;
that is your strong point, for in everything else he
will make you as mute as a fish.
 
 TIMOCLES 
But I swear by Athena that I will not answer
you first.
 
 DAMIS 
Well then, put your question, Timocles, for you

 

have won with that oath of yours. But no abuse,
please.

TIMOCLES 
Very well. Tell me then, you scoundrel, don’t
you think the gods exercise any providence ?
 
 DAMIS 
Not in the least.
 
 TIMOCLES 
What’s that you say? Then is all that we see
about us uncared for by any providence ?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes.
 
 TIMOCLES 
And the administration of the universe is not
directed by any god ?
 
 DAMIS 
No.
 
 TIMOCLES 
And everything drifts at random?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Men, do you hear that and put up with it? Aren’t
you going to stone the villain ?
 
 DAMIS 
Why do you embitter men against me, Timocles?
And who are you to get angry on behalf of the gods,
especially when they themselves are not angry?
They have done me no harm, you see, though they
have listened to me long—if indeed they have ears.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Yes, they have, Damis, they have, and they will
punish you some day in the hereafter.

DAMIS 
And when can they find time for me, when they
have so many cares, you say, and manage all creation,
which is unlimited in its extent? That is why they
have not yet paid.you back for all your false oaths
and everything else—I don’t want to be forced to
deal in abuse like you, contrary to our stipulations :
and yet I don’t see what better manifestation of
their providence they could have made than to crush
your life out miserably, miserable sinner that you are!
But it is clear that they are away from home, across
the Ocean, no doubt, visiting the guileless Ethiopians. At any rate it is their custom to go and dine
with them continually, even self-invited at times.

TIMOCLES 
What can I say in reply to all this impudence,
Damis ?
 
 DAMIS 
Tell me what I wanted you to tell me long ago,
how you were induced to believe that the gods
exercise providence.
 
 TIMOCLES 
In the first place the order of nature convinced
me, the sun always going the same road and the
moon likewise and the seasons changing and plants
growing and living creatures being born, and these
latter so cleverly devised that they can support life
and move and think and walk and build houses and
cobble shoes—and all the rest of it; these seem to
me to be works of providence.
 
 DAMIS 
That is just the question, Timocles, and you are
trying to beg it, for it is not yet proved that each of

 

these things is accomplished by providence. While
I myself would say that recurrent phenomena are
as you describe them, I need not, however, at once
admit a conviction that they recur by some sort of
providence, for it is possible that they began at
random and now take place with uniformity and
regularity. But you call necessity “order” and then,
forsooth, get angry if anyone does not follow you
when you catalogue and extol the characteristics of
these phenomena and think it a proof that each of
them is ordered by providence. So, in the words
of the comic poet,
 
 That’s but a sorry answer ; try again.

TIMOCLES 
For my part I don’t think that any further proof is
necessary on top of all this. Nevertheless I'll tell
ou. Answer me this: do you think that Homer is
the best poet ?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes, certainly,
 
 TIMOCLES 
Well, it was he that convinced me with his portrayal of the providence of the gods.
 
 DAMIS 
But, my admirable friend, everybody will agree
with you that Homer is a good poet, to be sure, but
not that he or any other poet whatsoever is a truthful
witness. They do not pay any heed to truth, I take
it, but only to charming their hearers, and to this
end they enchant them with metres and entrance

 

them with fables and in a word do anything to give
pleasure.

However, I should like to know what it
was of Homer’s that convinced you most. What he
says about Zeus, how his daughter and his brother
and his wife made a plot to fetter him? If Thetis
had not summoned Briareus, our excellent Zeus would
have been caught and put in chains. For this he
returned thanks to Thetis by deceiving Agamemnon,
sending a false vision to him, in order that many of
the Achaeans might lose their lives. Don’t you see,
it was impossible for him to hurl a thunderbolt and
burn. up Agamemnon himself without making
himself out a liar? Or perhaps you were most inclined to believe when you heard how Diomed
wounded Aphrodite and then even Ares himself at
the suggestion of Athena, and how shortly afterwards
the gods themselves fell to and began duelling
promiscuously, males and females ; Athena defeated
Ares, already overtaxed, no doubt by the wound he
had received from Diomed, and


"Leto fought against Hermes, the stalwart god of
good fortune.” 
Or perhaps you thought the tale about Artemis
credible, that, being a fault-finding person, she got
angry when she was not invited to a feast by Oeneus
and so turned loose on his land a monstrous boar of
irresistible strength. Did Homer convince you by
saying that sort of thing?

ZEUS 
I say, gods! what a shout the crowd raised,
applauding Damis! Our man seems to be in a fix.

 

In fact he is sweating and quaking ; it’s clear he is
going to throw up the sponge, and is already looking
about for a place to slip out and run away.
 
 TIMOCLES 
I suppose you don’t think that Euripides is telling
the truth either, when he puts the gods themselves
on the stage and shows them saving the herves and
destroying villains and impious fellows like yourself ?
 
 DAMIS 
Why, Timocles, you doughtiest of philosophers, if
the playwrights have convinced you by doing this,
you must needs believe either that Polus and Aristodemus and Satyrus are gods for the nonce, or that
the very masks representing the gods, the buskins, the trailing tunics, the cloaks, gauntlets, padded
paunches and all the other things with which they
make tragedy grand are divine; and that is
thoroughly ridiculous. I assure you when Euripides,
following his own devices, says what he thinks without being under any constraint imposed by the requirements of his plays, you will hear him speaking
frankly then :

 Dost see on high this boundless sweep of air 
 That lappeth earth about in yielding arms ? 
 Hold this to be Zeus, and believe it God. 
 From a lost play. These verses are translated by Cicero (Nat. Deor. ii, 25, 65). 

And again :
 'Twas Zeus, whoever Zeus is, for I know
Him not, except by hearsay. 
 From the lost Melanippe the Wise. The line was unfavourably received and subseqnently changed (Plut. Mor. 756 c). 

and so on.

TIMOCLES 
Well ‘then, all men and all nations have been mistaken in believing in gods and celebrating festivals ?
 
 DAMIS 
Thank you kindly, Timocles, for-reminding me of
what the nations believe... From that you can discern partitularly well that there is nothing in the
theory of gods, for the confusion is great, and some
believe one thing, some another. The Scythians
offer sacrifice to a scimitar, the Thracians to Zamolxis,
a runaway slave who came to them from Samos, the
Phrygians to Men, the Ethiopians to Day, the
Cyllenians to’ Phales, the Assyrians to a dove, the
Persians to fire, and the Egyptians to water. And
while all the Egyptians in common have water for a
god, the people of Memphis have the bull, the people
of Pelusium a wild onion, others an ibis or a crocodile,
others a dog-faced god or a cat or a monkey. Moreover, taking them by villages, some hold the right
shoulder a god and others, who dwell opposite them,
the left; others, half.a skull, and others an earthen
cup or dish. Isn’t that matter for laughter, good
Timocles?

MOMUS 
Didn't I tell you, gods, that all this would come
out and be thoroughly looked into ?
 
 ZEUS 
You did, Momus, and your criticism was just. I
shall try to set it all right if we escape this immediate
danger.
 
 TIMOCLES 
But, you god-hater, how about the oracles and pre-

 

dictions of coming events? whose work can you call
them except that of the gods and their providence ?
 
 DAMIS 
Don’t say a word about the oracles, my worthy
friend, or else I'l ask you which of them you want
to cite. The one that Apollo gave the Lydian, which
was thoroughly double-edged and two-faced, like
some of our Herms, which are double and just alike
on both sides, whichever way you look at them ; for
what was there to show that Croesus by crossing the
Halys would destroy his own kingdom rather than
that of Cyrus? And yet the luckless Sardian had
paid a. good many thousands for that ambidextrous
verse.
 
 MOMUS 
Gods, the man keeps saying the very things that
I most feared. Where is our handsome musician
now? (Zo Arotto) Go down and defend yourself
to him against these charges !
 
 ZEUS 
You are boring us to extinction, Momus, with yout
untimely eriticism.

TIMOCLES 
Take care what you are doing, Damis, you miscreant! You are all but upsetting the very temples
of the gods with your arguments, and their altars
too.
 
 DAMIS 
Not all the altars, as far as I am concerned,
Timocles ; for what harm do they do if they are full
of incense and sweet savour? But I should be glad
to see the altars of Artemis among the’ Tauvians
turned: completely upside down, those on which the
maiden goddess used to enjoy such horrid feasts.

 

 ZEUS 
Where did he get this insufferable stuff that he is
pouring out on us? He doesn’t spare any of the
gods, but speaks out like a fishwife and

 Takes first one, then the other, the guiltless along
with the guilty. 
 Iliad 15, 137. 


 MOMUS 
I tell you, Zeus, you'll find few that are guiltless
among us, and possibly as he continues the man will
soon fasten on a certain person of prominence.

TIMOCLES 
Then can’t you even hear Zeus when he thunders,
Damis, you god-fighter ?
 
 DAMIS 
Why shouldn’t I hear thunder, Timocles? But
whether it is Zeus that thunders or not, you no
doubt know best, coming as you do from some place
or other where the gods live! However, the people
who come here from Crete tell us a different tale,
that a grave is pointed out there with a tombstone
standing upon it which proves that Zeus cannot
thunder any more, as he has been dead this long
time.
 
 MOMUS 
I knew far in advance that the fellow would say
that. But why have you become so pale, Zeus, and
why do you tremble till your teeth chatter? You
should be bold and despise such mannikins.
 
 ZEUS 
What’s that you say, Momus? Despise them?
don’t you see how many are listening, and how they



 

have already been persuaded against us and he is
leading them after him tethered by the ears ?
 
 MOMUS 
But whenever you like, Zeus, you can let down a
cord of gold and

 Sway them aloft, with the earth and the sea, too,
into the bargain. 
 Iliad8, 24.

TIMOCLES 
Tell me, you scoundrel, have you ever made a
voyage ?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes, often, Timocles.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Well, you were kept in motion then, were you not,
either by-the wind striking the canvas and filling the
sails, or else by the rowers, but the steering was
done by a single man in ‘command, who kept the
vessel safe ?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes, certainly.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Then do you suppose that while the ship would
not sail if she were not steered, this universe keeps
in motion unsteered and unofficered ?
 
 ZEUS 
Good! Timocles put that very shrewdly, with a
valid illustration.

DAMIS 
Why, Timocles, you superlative admirer of the gods,
in the one case you would have seen the captain
always planning what had better be done and making
ready beforehand and giving orders to the crew, and


 

the ship would contain nothing at all that was
profitless and senseless, that was not wholly useful
and necessary to them for their voyage. But in the
other case your captain, the one who, you say, is in
command of this great ship, manages nothing in a
sensible or fitting way, and neither do the members
of his crew; the forestay is carried aft, maybe, and
both the sheets forward, the anchors are sometimes
‘of gold while the figurehead is of lead, and all the
ship’s underbody is painted while her upper works
are unsightly.

Among the sailors themselves you
will see that one who is lazy and lubberly and has
no heart for his work has a warrant or evena
commission, while another who is fearless at diving
and handy in manning the yards and best acquainted
with everything that needs to be done, is set to
pumping ship. So too with the passengers: you'll
see some gallows-bird or other sitting on the quarter
deck beside the captain and receiving attentions, and
another, a profligate, a parricide or a temple-robber,
getting inordinate honour and taking up the whole
deck of the ship, while a lot of good fellows are
crowded into a corner of the hold and trampled on
by men who are really their inferiors. Just think,
for example, what a voyage Socrates and Aristides
and Phocion had, without biscuits enough to eat and
without even room to stretch their legs on the bare
boards alongside the bilgewater, and on the other
hand what favours Callias and Midias and Sardanapalus enjoyed, rolling in luxury and spitting on
those beneath them !

That is what goes on in your ship, Timocles, you


 

greatest of sages, and that is why the disasters are
countless. But if there were really a captain in
command who saw and directed everything, first of
all he would not have failed to know who were the
good and who were the bad among the men aboard,
and secondly he would have given each man his due
according to his worth, giving to the better men the
better quarters beside him on deck and to the worse
the quarters in the hold; some of them he would
have made his messmates and advisers, and as for
the crew, a zealous man would have been assigned
to command forward or in the waist, or at any rate
somewhere or other over the heads of the rest, while
a timorous, shiftless one would get clouted over the
head half a dozen times a day with the rope’s end.
Consequently, my interesting friend, your comparison
of the ship would seem to have capsized for the want
of a good captain.

MOMUS 
Things are going finely for Damis now, and he is
driving under full sail to victory.
 
 ZEUS 
Your figure is apt, Momus. Yet Timocles can’t
think of anything valid, but launches at him these
commonplace, every-day arguments one after another,
all of them easy to capsize.

TIMOCLES 
Well then, as my comparison of the ship did not
seem to you very valid, attend now to my sheetanchor, as they call it, which you can’t by any possibility cut away.
 
 ZEUS 
What in the world is he going to say?

 

 TIMOCLES 
See whether I frame this syllogism logically, and
whether you can capsize it in any way. If there are
altars, there are also gods; but there are altars,
ergo there are also gods. What have you to say to
that?
 
 DAMIS 
After I have laughed to my heart’s content I'll
tell you.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Well, it looks as if you would never stop laughing ;
tell me, though, how you thought what I said was
funny.
 
 DAMIS 
Because you do not see that your anchor is
attached to a slender string—and it’s your sheetanchor at that! Having hitched the existence of
gods to the existence of altars, you think you have
made yourself a safe mooring. So, as you say you
have no better sheet-anchor than this, let's be
going.

TIMOCLES 
You admit your defeat, then, by going away first ?
 
 DAMIS 
Yes, Timocles, for like men threatened with
violence from some quarter or other, you have taken
refuge at the altars. Therefore I vow by the sheetanchor, I want to make an agreement with you now,
right at the altars, not to dispute any more on this
topic.
 
 TIMOCLES 
Are you mocking me, you ghoul, you miscreant,
you abomination, you gallows-bird, you scum of the
earth? Don’t we know who your father was, and

 

how your mother was a courtesan, and that you
strangled your brother and you run after women and
corrupt the young, you height of all that’s lewd and
shameless? Don’t run away! Take a thrashing
from me before you go! Ill brain you right now
with this brickbat, dirty miscreant that you are!

ZEUS 
One is going away laughing, gods, and the other
is following him up with abuse, because he can’t
stand the mockery of Damis ; it looks as if he would
hithim on the head with the brickbat. But what
ofus? What are we to do now?
 
 HERMES 
It seems to me that the comic poet hit it right
when he said :

 No harm’s been done you if you none admit. 
 Menander, Epitrepontes (179 Kock). 

What very great harm is it if a few men go away
convinced of all this? The people who think
diferently are in large majority, not only the rank
and file of the Greeks, but the barbarians to a man.
mY
 
 ZEUS 
Yes, Hermes, but what Darius said about Zopyrus
is very much in point too. I myself had rather have
this man Damis alone on my side than possess a
thousand Babylons.