in a free city furthering the interests of tyrants towards slavery

was responsible for actions which did credit to the city and to Greece . Therefore both here and everywhere else he was paid the highest honors rightly

we must thank Alexander on account of those who died but I think

Moreover these men trample on the people in their misfortune, and for this reason they deserve your hatred far more. For just as human bodies need most care when they are sick, so it is with cities, which need most attention in times of misfortune. To these men ?) only

[Very fragmentary.]

each of them gives, one in Thebes , another in Tanagra

Or that they do not pray for the overthrow of all that is left in Greece , when they are deriving profits from the cities that are being destroyed? Or that, while they wish you to spend your lives in fear and danger

Unimpressive in person on account of his thinness.

make accusations. And they make it clear that even when they were friends of the Lacedaemonians their speeches were prompted not by love for them but by hatred of Athens and a willingness to flatter those whose power at any time threatened you.

And when the power recently shifted from them to Philip they then chose to flatter him and Democrates of Aphidna who never leaves their sides makes jokes on the city’s misfortunes, abusing you in the market place by day and then coming at evening to dine at your table. And yet you, Democrates, are the one person who has no right to say a single hard word against the state, for two reasons:

first because you needed no one but yourself to show you that the city is grateful to her benefactors, you who now enjoy the honors for services which other men once rendered; and secondly because the people drew up a law forbidding anyone to speak ill of Harmodius and Aristogeiton or sing disparaging songs about them. It is therefore scandalous that, though the people saw fit to prevent even a drunken man from abusing your ancestors, you should be speaking ill of the state even when you are sober.

I have a few more points to make, gentlemen of the jury, and after summing up my argument will leave the platform. The case in which you are going to vote is an indictment for the proposing of illegal measures and the decree under consideration is one congratulating presidents. Presidents should observe the law during their period of office. These men have broken it. As evidence for both these facts you heard the actual laws read.

The sequel now rests with you. For you will make it plain whether you are going to punish the proposers of illegal measures or whether you intend to grant those honors, which till now have been paid to your benefactors, to presidents whose conduct is not lawful; and that too when you have sworn to observe the laws in giving your vote. There is, however, one argument open to them, namely that the people were compelled to pass the votes of honor. Even this cannot possibly mislead you; for it cannot be said that we were under any compulsion to crown the presidents.

Moreover the defendant has himself made your decision easy, since he stated in writing his reasons for crowning them. They had, he said, been just towards the Athenian people and observed the laws during their office. That is a statement for which you must now summon him to answer. And you, Philippides, show us that what you assumed about the presidents in your decree is true and you will be acquitted.

But if you think that your usual vulgarity and joking will secure your pardon in court or win from these men any indulgence or sympathy to which you are not entitled, you are a fool and very far from the mark. You see, you laid up popularity for yourself, not in Athens , but elsewhere. You thought fit to cringe before those whom the people feared rather than before the men who now have power to save you.

You have concluded that one person will be immortal, yet you sentenced to death a city as old as ours, never realizing the simple fact that no tyrant has yet risen from the dead, while many cities, though utterly destroyed, have come again to power. You and your party took no account of the history of the Thirty or of the city’s triumph over her assailants from without and those within her walls who joined in the attack upon her. It was well known that you were all watching the city’s fortunes, waiting for the chance to say or do something against the people.

Will you dare then presently to mention opportunities, when the opportunities you sought were for the city’s ruin? Have you brought your children with you into court, Philippides? Are you going to bring them soon on to the platform and so claim pity from the jury? You have no right to pity. When others felt compassion for the city’s misfortunes, you and your like were exulting over her. They had resolved to save Greece in a spirit which ill deserved the fate they met. But you, who are unjustly bringing Athens into the depths of shame, deserve the punishment you are now about.to suffer.

Why should you spare this man, gentlemen? Because he is a democrat? Why, you are well aware that he has chosen to be the slave of tyrants and is ready on the other hand to give the people orders. Would it be because he is a good man? No; for you twice condemned him as a criminal. True, you may say, but he is useful. Granted; but if you use a man whom you are known to have condemned as wicked, it will appear either that your judgements are wrong or that you welcome wicked men. It is not therefore right to take upon yourselves this man’s misdeeds. On the contrary: the transgressor must be punished.

And if anyone comes forward with the plea that he has twice before been convicted for illegal proposals and that therefore you should acquit him, please do just the opposite, and that for two reasons. In the first place it is a piece of good fortune, when a man is known to have proposed illegal measures, that you should catch him coming up for trial a third time. He is not a good man and need not be spared as such. Indeed you should rid yourselves of him as quickly as you can, since he has twice already proved his character to you.

And secondly, compare the case of false witness. If people have been twice convicted of this, you have allowed them to refrain from giving evidence a third time, even of events at which they have themselves been present, so that, if anyone is disfranchised, responsibility shall rest, not on the people, but on the man himself, for continuing to bear false witness. Similarly men convicted of illegal proposals need not bring forward proposals in future. If they do they are clearly actuated by some private motive. So that people of this type deserve punishment, not pity.

I do not wish to speak too long after setting myself as a limit an amphora of water in the clock; so the clerk will read you the indictment again. And now bear in mind the accusations and the laws which you heard read and bring in a verdict that will be just and also expedient for yourselves.