ZEUS 
No more murmuring, Gods, or gathering in corners
and whispering in each other’s ears because you take
it hard that many share our table who are not worthy.
Now that a public meeting upon this question has
been authorised, let each declare his opinion openly
and bring his charges. Hermes, make the proclamation required by law.
 
 HERMES 
Hear ye! Silence! Among the gods of full standing, entitled to speak, who desires to do so? The
question concerns resident aliens and foreigners.
 
 MOMUS 
I, Momus here, Zeus, if you would let me speak.
 
 ZEUS 
The proclamation itself gives permission, so that
you will have no need of mine,

MOMUS 
Well then, I say that some of us behave shockingly ;
it is not enough for them that they themselves have
become gods instead of men, but unless they can
make their very attendants and servants as good as
we are, they do not think they have done anything
important or enterprising. And I beg you, Zeus, to
let me speak frankly, for I could not do otherwise.
Everybody knows how free of speech I am, and
disinclined to hush up anything at all that is ill done.
I criticize everybody and express my views openly,
without either fearing anyone or concealing my
opinion out of respect, so that most people think
me vexatious and meddling by nature; they call
me a regular public prosecutor. However, inasmuch
as it is according to law, and the proclamation has
been made, and you, Zeus, allow me to speak with
complete liberty, I shall do so, without anyreservations.

Many, I say, not content that they themselves
take part in the same assemblies as we and feast
with us on equal terms, and that too when they are
half mortal, havelugged up into heaven their own
servants and boon-companions and have fraudulently
registered them, so that now they receive largesses
and share in sacrifices on an equal footing without
even having paid us the tax of resident aliens.
 
 ZEUS 
Let us have no riddles, Momus ; speak in plain and
explicit language, and supply the name, too. Asit is,
you have flung your statement into the midst of us

 

all, so that many are making guesses and applying
your remarks now to one and now to another. Being
an exponent of frankness, you must not stick at saying
anything.

MOMUS 
It is splendid, Zeus, that you actually urge me to
frankness; that is a truly royal, high-souled action.
Therefore I shall give the name. It is this peerless
Dionysus, who is half human; in fact, on his mother’s
side he is not even Greek, but the grandson of a
Syrophoenician trader named Cadmus. Inasmuch
as he has been honoured with immortality, I say
nothing of the man himself—either of his hood or of
his drunkenness or of his gait; for you all, I think,
see that he is womanish and unmanly in his character,
half crazy, with strong drink on his breath from the
beginning of the day. But he has foisted upon us a
whole clan; he presents himself at the head of his
rout, and has made gods out of Pan and Silenus and
the Satyrs, regular farm-hands and goat-herds,
most of them—capering fellows with queer shapes.
One of them has horns and looks like a goat from the
waist down, and wears a long beard, so that he is
not much different from a goat. Another is a baldpated gaffer with a flat nose who usually rides on a
donkey. He is a Lydian. The Satyrs are prickeared, and they too are bald, with horns like those
that bud on new-born kids; they are Phrygians, and
they all have tails. D’ye see what sort of gods he is
making for us, the bounder?

And then we wonder that men despise us when
they see such laughable and portentous deities! I
omit to mention that he has also brought up two
women, one his sweetheart Ariadne, whose very
head-band he has admitted into the starry choir, and
the other the daughter of Icarius the farmer! And
what is most ridiculous of all, Gods, even Erigone’s
dog—that too he has brought up, so that the little
maid shall not be distressed if she cannot have in
heaven her pet, darling doggie! Does not all
this look to you like insolence, impudence, and
mockery? But let me tell you about others.

ZEUS 
Say nothing, Momus, about either Asclepius or
Heracles, for I see where you are heading in your
speech. As far as they are concerned, one of them
is a doctor who cures people of their illnesses and is
“as good as a host in himself,” whilst Heracles,
though my own son, purchased his immortality at
the cost of many labours; so do not denounce them.
 
 MOMUS 
I shall hold my tongue, Zeus, for your sake, although
I have plenty to say. Indeed, if there were nothing
else, they still carry the marks of fire! And if it
were permissible to employ free speech about yourself, I should have plenty to say.





 

 ZEUS 
I assure you, about me it is quite permissible.
But you are not prosecuting me as an alien, are you?
 
 MOMUS 
Well, in Crete not only that may be heard, but
they tell another story about you and show people
atomb. However, I put no faith either in them or
in the Achaeans of Aegium, who assert that you are a
changeling.

But I do intend to speak of one thing
that in my opinion ought by all means to be censured. 

 
It was you, Zeus, who began these illegalities and
caused the corruption of our body politic by cohabiting with mortal women and going down to visit them,
now in one form, now in another. It has gone so far
that we are afraid that someone may make a victim
of you if he catches you when you are a bull, or that
some goldsmith may work you up when you are gold,
and instead of Zeus we may have you turning up as a
necklace or a bracelet or an earring. However that
may be, you have filled heaven with these—demigods! I do not care to put it otherwise. And it is a
very ridiculous state of things when one suddenly
hears that Heracles has been appointed a god, but
Eurystheus, who used to order him about, is dead;
and that the temple of Heracles, who was a slave,
and the tomb of Eurystheus, his master, stand side
by side; and again, that in Thebes Dionysus is a



 

god, but his cousins Pentheus, Actaeon, and Learchus
were of all mankind the most ill-fated.

From the moment that you, Zeus, once opened our
doors to such as they and turned your attention to
mortal women, everyone else has copied you, and
not the male sex alone but—what is most unseemly—even the goddesses. Who does not know about
Anchises, Tithonus, Endymion, Iasion, and the rest of
them? So I think I shall omit those incidents, for
it would take too long if I were to pass censure on
them.
 
 ZEUS 
Say nothing about Ganymede, Momus, for I
shall be angry if you vex the little lad by disparaging
his birth.
 
 MOMUS 
Then am I not to speak of the eagle, either, and
say that he too is in heaven, where he sits upon your
royal sceptre and all but nests on your head, passing
for a god?

Or must I omit him also, for the sake of
Ganymede?
But Attis at all events, Zeus, and Corybas and
Sabazius —how did they get trundled in upon us?





 

Or Mithras yonder, the Mede, with his caftan and
his cap, who does not even speak Greek, so that he
cannot even understand if one drinks his health?
The result is that the Scythians—the Getae among
them—seeing all this have told us to go hang, and
now confer immortality on their own account and
elect as gods whomsoever they will, in the selfsame
way that Zamolxis, a slave, obtained fraudulent
admission to the roster, getting by with it somehow
or other.

All that, however, is as nothing, Gods.—You
there, you dog-faced, linen-vested Egyptian, who
are you, my fine fellow, and how do you make out
that you are a god, with that bark of yours? And
with what idea does this spotted bull of Memphis 
receive homage and give oracles and have prophets?
I take shame to mention ibises and monkeys and
billy-goats and other creatures far more ludicrous
that somehow or other have been smuggled out of
Egypt into heaven. How can you endure it, Gods,
to see them worshipped as much as you, or even
more? And you, Zeus, how can you put up with
it when they grow ram’s horns upon you?

ZEUS 
All these points that you mention about the Egyptians are in truth unseemly. Nevertheless, Momus,
most of them are matters of symbolism and one who
is not an adept in the mysteries really must not
laugh at them.
 
 MOMUS 
A lot we need mysteries, Zeus, to know that gods
are gods, and dogheads are dogheads!
 
 ZEUS 
Never mind, I say, about the Egyptians. Some
other time we shall discuss their case at leisure.
Go on and name the others.

MOMUS 
Trophonius, Zeus, and (what sticks in my gorge
beyond everything) Amphilochus, who, though the
son of an outcast and matricide, gives prophecies,
the miscreant, in Cilicia, telling lies most of the time
and playing charlatan for the sake of his two obols.
That is why you, Apollo, are no longer in favour;
at present, oracles are delivered by every stone and
every altar that is drenched with oil and has garlands
and can provide itself with a charlatan—of whom
there are plenty. Already the statue of Polydamas
the athlete heals those who have fevers in Olympia,


 

and the statue of Theagenes does likewise in Thasos ; 
they sacrifice to Hector in Troy and to Protesilaus
on the opposite shore, in the Chersonese. So, ever
since we became so numerous, perjury and sacrilege
have been increasing, and in general they have
despised us—quite rightly.

Let this suffice on the subject of those who are
base-born and fraudulently registered. But there
are many outlandish names that have come to my
ears, of beings not to be found among us and
unable to exist at all as realities; and over these
too, Zeus, I make very merry. Where is that famous
Virtue, and Nature, and Destiny, and Chance? They
are unsubstantial, empty appellations, excogitated by
those dolts, the philosophers. All the same, artificial as they are, they have so imposed upon the
witless that nobody is willing to do as much as
sacrifice to us, knowing that though he offer ten
thousand hecatombs, nevertheless “Chance” will
effect what is “fated” and what has been “spun”
for every man from the beginning. So I should like



 

to ask you, Zeus, if you have anywhere seen either
Virtue or Nature or Destiny. I know that you too
are always hearing of them in the discussions of the
philosophers, unless you are deaf, so as not to be able
to hear them screaming. 

 
I still have plenty to say, but I will bring my speech
to an end, for I notice that many are annoyed with
me for my remarks, and are hissing, particularly
those who have been touched to the quick by my
frankness.

To conclude, then, with your consent,
Zeus, I shall read a motion on this subject which
has already been committed to writing.
 
 ZEUS 
Read it, for not all your criticisms were unreasonable, and we must put a stop to most of this, so that
it may not increase.
Momus (reads)
“With the blessing of Heaven! In a regular
session of the assembly, held on the seventh of the
month, Zeus presiding, Poseidon first vice-president,
Apollo second vice-president, Momus, son of Night,
recorder, the following resolution was proposed by
Sleep : 



 

“WHEREAS many aliens, not only Greeks but barbarians, in nowise worthy of admission to our body
politic, by obtaining fraudulent registration in one
way or another and coming to be accounted gods
have so filled heaven that our festal board is packed
with a noisy rabble of polyglot flotsam; and
WHEREas the ambrosia and the nectar have run low,
so that a cup now costs a mina, on account of the
vast number of drinkers; and wHereas in their
boorishness they have thrust aside the ancient and
genuine gods, have claimed precedence for themselves, contrary to all the institutions of our fathers,
and want to be pre-eminently honoured on earth:
therefore

“BE IT RESOLVED by the senate and the commons
that a meeting of the assembly be convoked on
Olympus at the time of the winter solstice; that
seven gods of full standing be chosen as deputies, three
to be from the old senate of the time of Cronus, and
four from the Twelve, including Zeus; that these
deputies before convening take the regular oath,
invoking the Styx; that Hermes by proclamation
assemble all who claim to belong to our body; that
these present themselves with witnesses prepared to
take oath, and with birth-certificates ; that they then
appear individually, and the deputies after investigation of each case either declare them to be gods
or send them down to their sepulchres and the
graves of their ancestors; and that if any one of
those who shall fail of approval and shall have
been expelled once for all by the deputies be
caught setting foot in heaven, he be thrown into
Tartarus ;

“AND BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that each ply

 

his own trade; that Athena shall not heal the
sick or Asclepius give oracles or Apollo combine in
himself so many activities; he shall select one and
be either seer or singer or physician;

that the
philosophers be warned not to make up empty names
or talk nonsense about matters of which they know
nothing;

that in the case of those who already have
been vouchsafed temples or sacrifices, their images be
pulled down and those of Zeus or Hera or Apollo or
one of the others be substituted; but the city shall
raise a funeral-mound for them and set a gravestone
upon it instead of an altar; that if anyone shall fail
to comply with this proclamation and shall be unwilling to appear before the deputies, judgement by
default shall be rendered against him.”
There you have the resolution.

ZEUS 
It is most equitable, Momus ; so let everyone who is
in favour of the resolution hold up his hand—but
no! I declare it carried, as those who will not vote
for it will be the majority, I know. Well, you may
go now; but when Hermes makes the proclamation,
present yourselves, and let each of you bring unmistakable means of identification and clear proofs—
his father’s name and his mother’s, why and how he
became a god, and his tribe and clan. For if anyone
shall fail to put all this in evidence, it will make no
difference to the deputies that he has a huge temple
on earth and that men believe him to be a god.