ZEUS 
Plague take all philosophers who say that bliss is
to be found only among the gods! If they but
knew all that we endure for the sake of men, they
would not envy us our nectar and ambrosia, putting
their trust in Homer, a blind man and a fraud, who
called us blissful and told about what is in heaven
when he could not even see what is on earth. Here
is an example right at hand: Helius puts his team to
his chariot and traverses the sky all day long, clad in
a garment of fire and resplendent with rays, not even
getting leisure enough to scratch his ear, as they say :
for if he unconsciously relaxes the least bit, his horses
run away, turn out of the road, and burn everything
up. Selene, too, goes about without a wink of sleep,
giving light to night-roisterers and people returning
late from dinners. Apollo, again, has taken up a
very active profession, and has been deafened
almost completely by people besetting him with
requests for prophecies. One moment he has to be
in Delphi; the next, he runs to Colophon; from
there he crosses to Xanthus, and again at full speed

 

to Delos or to Branchidae. In a word, wherever his
prophetess, after drinking from the holy well and
chewing laurel and setting the tripod ashake, bids
him appear, there is no delaying—he must present
himself immediately to reel off his prophecies, or
else it is all up with his reputation in the profession.
I say nothing of the devices they get up to test his
powers of divination, cooking mutton and turtle
together, so that if he had not a good nose, that
Lydian would have gone off laughing at him. As
for Asclepius, he is pestered by the sick: “Dire
sights he sees, and touches what he loathes, and
in the woes of others finds a crop of sorrow for
himself.” Why should I refer either to the Winds,
that aid the crops and speed the ships on their
courses and blow upon the winnowers, or to Sleep,
that wings his way to everyone, or to Jack-of-dreams,
that keeps vigil all night long with Sleep and serves
as his interpreter? All this work the gods do out
of love for man, each contributing to life on earth.

And yet the others are not so badly off in
comparison with myself. I am the monarch and
father of all: but how many discomforts I put up
with and how many bothers I have, distracted as I
am by such a number of things to think of! First,
I must oversee the work of all the other gods who
help me in any way in administering my sovereignty,
in order that they may not be remiss in it. Then
I myself have to do any number of tasks that are
almost impossible to carry out on account of their
minuteness; for it is not to be supposed that I



 

simply manage and direct in person the principal
features of my administration, such as rain, hail, wind,
and lightning, and that then I am through, being
dispensed from thinking of details. No, not only
must I do all that, but I must look in all directions
at the same time and keep an eye on everybody,
just like the herdsman at Nemea, to see who is
stealing, who is committing perjury, who is offering
sacrifice, whether anybody has poured a drinkoffering, from what quarter the steam and the smoke
of burnt-offerings rise, who has called upon me in
sickness or at sea. What is most laborious of all,
at one and the same moment I must attend the
great sacrifice at Olympia, keep an eye on the armies
at war near Babylon, send hail in the country of the
Getae, and attend a banquet among the Ethiopians.
At that, it is not easy to escape criticism. It often
happens that the others, “the gods and the warriors
crested with horse-tails,” sleep all through the night,
while I, though Zeus, am not “held in the sweetness
of slumber,” for if I drowse off, even for an instant,
Epicurus is instantly confirmed in his assertion that
we exercise no providence over what happens on
earth. And we cannot make light of the danger if
men are going to take his word for this’: our temples
will have no wreaths, our wayside shrines no savoury
steam, our wine-bowls no drink-offerings, our altars
will be cold, and in short there will be general
dearth of sacrifices and oblations, and famine
will be rife. For that reason, like the master of
a ship, I stand by myself high up on the stern with
the tiller in my hands, and everybody else aboard
gets drunk, perhaps, and goes to sleep, whereas I,



 

without closing my eyes or eating, “ponder in heart
and in soul” for the benefit of all, rewarded only
by being considered captain.

So I should like to
ask the philosophers, who say that only the gods are
happy, when they suppose we really find leisure for
our nectar and our ambrosia in the midst of our
countless bothers.
Now, here is a case in point: for lack of spare
time we are keeping all these stale lawsuits filed
away, already spoiled by mildew and spiders’ webs,
especially those brought against certain persons
by the sciences and the arts—some of these are very
antiquated. People are making an outcry on all
sides and losing patience and hurling reproaches at
Justice.and blaming me for my slowness, not knowing that the hearings have not been postponed,
as it happens, on account of our negligence, but on
account of the bliss in which they imagine we exist :
for that is what they call our press of business.

HERMES 
I myself hear a great many complaints of that sort
on earth, Zeus, but I did not venture to mention them
to you. Now, however, I shall do so, as you began
the discussion of this topic. They are indeed out of
patience and indignant, father, and although they do
not venture to talk openly, they put their heads
together and grumble, finding fault with the delay.
These men should have known long ago how things
stood with them and should have acquiesced in the
verdict in each case.
 
 ZEUS 
Well, what do you think, Hermes? Shall we open
a session.of court for them, or do you wish we should
announce it for next year ?



 

 HERMES 
No, indeed ; let us open it now.
 
 ZEUS 
Do so. Fly down and proclaim that there will be
a session of court under the following regulations.
All who have entered suit are to come to the Areopagus to-day; at that place Justice is to empanel
juries for them out of the entire body of Athenians,
the number of jurymen to depend upon the penalty
involved ; and if anyone thinks that his hearing has
been unjust, he is to be allowed to appeal to me and
have the case tried afresh, just as if it had not been
tried at all. (Zo Justice) Daughter, take your place
beside the Dread Goddesses, empanel the juries and
have an eye on the trials.

JUSTICE 
Back to earth once more, to be driven off by them
and to flee from the world again because I cannot
stand being laughed at by Injustice ?
 
 ZEUS 
You must be of good hope. Certainly by now the
philosophers have persuaded them to regard you
more highly than Injustice; especially the son of
Sophroniscus, who praised just dealing to the skies
and declared it the greatest of blessings.
 
 JUSTICE 
Truly the very man you mention profited greatly
by his talk about me! He was handed over to the
Eleven, thrown into prison, and drank hemlock, poor
fellow, before he had even paid that cock to



 

Asclepius ; so much the better of the argument had
his accusers, whose philosophy was directly opposed
to his, and favoured Injustice.

ZEUS 
The people were still unfamiliar with the teachings of philosophy at that time, and there were few
that pursued it, so it was natural that the juries
inclined towards Anytus and Meletus. But at
present, do not you see how many short cloaks and
staves and wallets there are? On all sides there are
long beards, and books in the left hand, and everybody preaches in favour of you; the public walks
are full of people assembling in companies and in
battalions, and there is nobody who does not want to
be thought a scion of Virtue. In fact, many, giving
up the trades that they had before, rush after the
wallet and the cloak, tan their bodies in the sun to
Ethiopian hue, make themselves extemporaneous
philosophers out of cobblers or carpenters, and go
about praising you and your virtue. Consequently,
in the words of the proverb, it would be easier for a
man to fall in a boat without hitting a plank than
for your eye to miss a philosopher wherever it looks.

JUSTICE 
Yes, but those very men frighten me, Zeus, by
quarrelling with each other and showing unfairness
even in their discussions of me. It is rumoured,
too, that while most of them claim kinship with me
in words, when it comes to facts they do not even
open their house to me at all, but make it plain that
they will lock me out if ever I come to their door ;
for they made Injustice their bosom friend long ago.


 

 ZEUS 
They are not all bad, my daughter, and it is
enough if you find some that are good. But go now,
so that a few cases, at least, may be heard to-day.

HERMES 
Let us set out in this direction, Justice, straight for
Sunium, not far from the foot of Hymettus, to the left
of Parnes, where you see those two heights ; you
have probably forgotten the way long since. But why
are you crying and taking it hard? Don't be afraid:
things are no longer the same in life. All those
Scirons and Pinebenders and Busirises and Phalarises
whom you used to fear in former days are dead, and
now Wisdom and the Academy and the Porch are
in full sway, seek for you everywhere, and hold
conversations about you, in open-mouthed expectation that, from some quarter or other, you may
perhaps come flying down to them once more.
 
 JUSTICE 
Well, Hermes, you are the only person who can
tell me the truth, inasmuch as you associate with
them a great deal, passing your days with them in
the athletic clubs and in the market-place; for you
are the god of the market, as well as being crier in
the meetings of the assembly. What sort’of people
are they, and is it possible for me to abide among
them?
 
 HERMES 
To be sure; I should not be treating you fairly if
I did not tell you, since you are my sister. Most of



 

them have been helped not a little by philosophy:
for if it goes no further, at least regard for their
cloth makes them more circumspect in sinning.
However, you will come upon a few rascals among
them—I must tell the truth, I suppose—and some who
are partly wise and partly foolish. You see, when
Wisdom took them in hand and dyed them over, all
those who thoroughly absorbed the dye were made
entirely serviceable, without any intermixture of
other hues, and they are quite ready to receive you ;
while those who because of their ingrained filth
were not deeply penetrated by the colouring matter
of the dyestuff are better than the rest, to be sure,
but unfinished products, half-white, blemished, and
spotted like the pard. And there are some who
have only touched the kettle on the outside with
a finger-tip and smeared on some of the soot, yet
think that they too are well enough dyed over.
You, however, will of course pass your time with
the best of them.

But in the course of our talk we are already drawing near to Attica, so let us leave Sunium on our
right, and now let us glide down to the Acropolis.
Now that we have alighted, you sit down here
on the Areopagus somewhere, facing the Pnyx, and
wait until I give out the proclamation from Zeus.
If I climb the Acropolis it will be easier for me to
summon everybody from that point of vantage for
the voice.
 
 JUSTICE 
Don’t go, Hermes, until you have told me who
comes here, the person with the horns and the
shepherd’s pipe and the hairy legs.

 

 HERMES 
What! Don’t you know Pan, the most bacchanalian of the servants of Dionysus? He formerly lived
on Parthenion, but at the time of the approach of
Datis by sea and the landing of the barbarians at
Marathon, he came unasked to fight on the side of
the Athenians ; and since then, accepting this cavern
under the Acropolis, a little above the Pelasgicon, 
he lives in it, paying the usual tax as a resident
alien. Very likely he has seen us near and is coming
up to greet us.

PAN 
Good day to you, Hermes and Justice.
 
 HERMES 
The same to you, Pan, most musical and most
frolicsome of all satyrs, and at Athens the most
bellicose !
 
 PAN 
What business brought you two here, Hermes ?
 
 HERMES 
She will tell you the whole story; I am going to
the Acropolis, to make my proclamation.
 
 JUSTICE 
Zeus sent me down, Pan, to empanel juries for the
lawsuits. But how do you find things in Athens?
 
 PAN 
On the whole, I do not get on as well as I ought
here—much worse than I expected; and yet I dis-



 

pelled the mighty hue and cry of the barbarians.
In spite of that, they come up only two or three
times a year, pick out and sacrifice in my honour
a he-goat with a powerful goatish smell, and then
feast on the meat, making me a mere witness of
their good cheer and paying their respects to me
only with their noise. However, their laughter and
fun afford me some amusement.

JUSTICE 
In general, Pan, have they been improved in
virtue by the philosophers ?
 
 PAN 
What do you mean by philosophers? Those
gloomy fellows, flocking together, with beards like
mine, who talk so much?
 
 JUSTICE 
To be sure.
 
 PAN 
I do not know at all what they mean and_I do not
understand their wisdom, for I am a mountaineer
and I have not studied those clever, citified, technical
terms, Justice. How could a literary man or a philosopher possibly come from Arcadia? My wisdom
does not go beyond the flute and the pipes ; for the
rest I am a goatherd, a dancer, and if need bea
fighter. However, I hear them bawling continually
and talking about “virtue” (whatever that means)
and “ideas” and “nature” and “things incorporeal,”
terms that are to me unknown and outlandish. They
begin their discussions peaceably, but as the conference proceeds they raise their voices to a high
falsetto, so that, what with their excessive straining
and their endeavour to talk at the same time, their

 

faces get red, their necks get swollen, and their veins
stand out like those of flute-players when they try to
blow into a closed flute. In fact, they spoil their
arguments, confuse the original subject of inquiry,
and then, after abusing one another, most of them,
they go away wiping the sweat off their foreheads
with their bent fingers; and the man that is most
loud-mouthed and impudent and leaves last when they
break up is considered to have the best of it. However, the common people admire them, especially
those who have nothing more pressing to do, and
stand there enchanted by their impudence and their
shouting. For my part, I considered them impostors
in consequence of all this, and was annoyed at the
resemblance in beard. But perhaps there was something beneficial to the common weal in their shouting
and some good sprang from those technical terms
of theirs—I can’t say. However, if I am to tell the
truth without any reserve—for I dwell on a look-out,
as you see—I have often seen many of them in the
dark of the evening—

JUSTICE 
Hush, Pan ; didn’t it seem to you that Hermes is
making a proclamation ?
 
 PAN 
Why, yes.
 
 HERMES 
Oyez, oyez! Under the blessing of Heaven, we
shall hold a session of court to-day, the seventh of
Elaphebolion. All who have entered suits are to come
to the Areopagus, where Justice will empanel the juries


 

and be present in person at the trials. The jurors
will be drawn from the entire body of Athenians ;
the pay will be three obols a case, and the number
of jurors will be in accordance with the charge. All
those who have entered suits but have died before
they came to trial are to be sent back to earth by
Aeacus. If anyone thinks he has had an unjust
hearing, he is to appeal the case, and the appeal will
be to Zeus.
 
 PAN 
Heavens, what a hubbub! What a shout they
raised, Justice, and how eagerly they are gathering
at a run, dragging each other up the hill, straight for
the Areopagus ! Hermes, too, is here already, so busy
yourselves with the cases, empanel your juries and
give your verdicts as usual; I am going back to the
cave to pipe one of the passionate melodies with ©
which I am in the habit of provoking Echo. I am
sick of trials and speeches, for I hear the pleaders on
the Areopagus every day.

HERMES 
Come, Justice, let’s call them to the bar.
 
 JUSTICE 
Quite right. Indeed they are approaching incrowds, as you see, with a great noise, buzzing about
the hilltop like wasps.
 
 ATHENIAN 
I’ve got you, curse you !
 
 SECOND ATHENIAN 
You are a blackmailer !
 
 THIRD ATHENIAN 
At last you are going to pay the penalty !

 

 
 FOURTH ATHENIAN 
I will prove that you have committed horrible
crimes !
 
 FIFTH ATHENIAN 
Empanel my jury first!
 
 SIXTH ATHENIAN 
Come to court with me, scoundrel !
 
 SEVENTH ATHENIAN 
Stop choking me!
 
 JUSTICE 
Do you know what we ought to do, Hermes? Let
us put off the rest of. the cases until to-morrow, and
to-day let us provide only for those entered by
professions or pursuits or sciences against men. Pass
me up the writs of that description. 
 HERMES 
Intemperance v. the Academy in re Polemo:
kidnapping. 
 JUSTICE 
Draw seven jurors.
 
 HERMES 
Stoa v. Pleasure: alienation of affections— because
Pleasure coaxed away her lover, Dionysius. 
 JUSTICE 
Five will do.





 

 HERMES 
High-living v. Virtue, re Aristippus. 
 JUSTICE 
Let five sit in this case too.
 
 HERMES 
Banking v. Diogenes: absconding. 
 JUSTICE 
Draw only three.
 
 HERMES 
Painting v. Pyrrho: breach of contract. 
 JUSTICE 
Let nine sit on jury.

HERMES 
Do you want us to provide juries for these two
cases also, recorded yesterday against the public
speaker ? 
 JUSTICE 
Let us first finish up the cases of long-standing ;
these can go over until to-morrow for trial.
 
 HERMES 
Why, these are of the same nature, and the complaint, although recent, is very like those for which
we have already provided juries, so that it ought to
be tried along with them.






 

 JUSTICE 
You appear to have been unduly influenced to
make the request, Hermes. Let us make the
drawing, however, since you wish ; but only for these
two cases; we have enough on the docket. Give
me the writs.
 
 HERMES 
Oratory v. the Syrian: neglect. Dialogue v. the
same: maltreatment.
 
 JUSTICE 
Who is this man? His name is not recorded.
 
 HERMES 
Empanel a jury for him as it stands in the writ—
for the public speaker, the Syrian. There is nothing
to hinder its being done anonymously.

 
 JUSTICE 
Look here, are we really to try cases from over the
border here in Athens, on the Areopagus? They
ought to have been tried on the other side of the
Euphrates. However, draw eleven jurors, the same
to sit for both cases.
 
 HERMES 
You are right, Justice, to avoid spending too much
in jury-fees.

JUSTICE 
Let the first jury sit, in the“case of the Academy
v. Intemperance. Fill the water-clock. Plead first,
Intemperance . . . Why does she hold her tongue
and shake her head? Go to her and find out,
Hermes.
 
 HERMES 
She says that she cannot plead her case because her
tongue is tied with drink and she is afraid of getting


 

laughed at in court. She can hardly stand, as you
see.
 
 JUSTICE 
Then let her have an advocate appear, one of these
public pleaders. There are plenty of them ready to
split their lungs for three obols !
 
 HERMES 
But not one will care to espouse the cause of
Intemperance, not openly, at any rate. However,
this request of hers seems reasonable.
 
 JUSTICE 
What request?
 
 HERMES 
“The Academy,” she says, “is always ready to
argue on both sides and trains herself to be able to
speak eloquently both pro and con. Therefore let
her plead first for me, and then after that she will
plead for herself.”
 
 JUSTICE 
That is unprecedented. Nevertheless, make both
speeches, Academy, since it is easy for you.

ACADEMY 
Listen first, gentlemen of the jury, to the plea of
Intemperance, as the water now runs for her.
The poor creature has been treated with the
greatest injustice by me, the Academy. She has
been robbed of the only friendly and faithful slave
she had, who thought none of her orders unbecoming,
Polemo yonder, who used to go roistering through
the middle of the square in broad day, who kept
a music-girl’and had himself sung to from morning
to night, who was always drunk and debauched and

 

had garlands of flowers on his head. That this: is
true, all the Athenians will testify ; for they never
saw Polemosober. But when the unhappy man went
rollicking to the Academy's door, as he used to go to
everybody's, she claimed him as her slave, snatched
him out of the hands of Intemperance by main
strength, and took him into her house. Then she
forced him to drink water, taught him to keep sober,
stripped off his garlands: and when he ought to have
been drinking at table, she made him study intricate,
gloomy terms, full of profound thought. So, instead
of the flush that formerly glowed upon him, the
poor man has grown pale, and his body is shrivelled ;
he has forgotten all his songs, and he sometimes sits
without food or drink till the middle of the evening,
talking the kind of balderdash that I, the Academy,
teach people to talk unendingly. What is more, he
even abuses Intemperance at my instigation and says
any number of unpleasant things about her.
I have said about all that there is to say for
Intemperance. Now I will speak for myself, and
from this point let the water run for me.
 
 JUSTICE 
What in the world will she say in reply to that?
Anyhow, pour in the same amount for her in turn.

ACADEMY 
Heard casually, gentlemen of the jury, the plea
which the advocate has made in behalf of Intemperance is quite plausible, but if you give an unprejudiced
hearing to my plea also, you will find out that I have
done her no wrong at all.
This man Polemo, who, she « says, is her servant,
was not naturally bad or inclined to Intemperance,

 

but had a nature like mine. But while he was still
young and impressionable she preémpted him, with
the assistance of Pleasure, who usually helps her, and
corrupted the poor fellow, surrendering him unconditionally to dissipation and to light women, so
that he had not the slightest remnant of shame. In
fact, what she thoughf€ was said on her behalf a
moment ago, you should consider said on my behalf.
The poor fellow went about from early to late with
garlands on his head, flushed with wine, attended by
music right through the public square, never sober,
making roisterous calls upon everybody, a disgrace to
his ancestors and to the whole city and a laughing-stock to strangers. 

 
But when he came to my house, it chanced that,
as usual, the doors were wide open and I was
discoursing about virtue and temperance to such of
my friends as were there. Coming in upon us with
his flute and his garlands, first of all he began to shout
and tried to break up our meeting by disturbing it
with his noise. But we paid no attention to him, and
as he was not entirely sodden with Intemperance,
little by little he grew sober under the influence of
our discourses, took off his garlands, silenced his
flute-player, became ashamed of his purple mantle,
and, awaking, as it were, from profound sleep, saw his
own condition and condemned his past life. The flush
that came from Intemperance faded and vanished,
and he flushed for shame at what he was doing. At
length he abandoned her then and there, and took up
with me, not because I either invited or constrained
him, as this person says, but voluntarily, because he
believed the conditions here were better.

 

Please summon him now, that you may see how he
has fared at my hands.... Taking this man,
gentlemen of the jury, when he was in a ridiculous
plight, unable either to talk or to stand on account
of his potations, I converted him and sobered him
and made him from a slave into a well-behaved,
temperate man, very valuable to the Greeks; and he
himself is grateful to me for it, as are also his
relatives on his account.
I have done. It is for you now to consider which
of us it was better for him to associate with.

JUSTICE 
Come, now, do not delay ; cast your ballots and get
up; others must have their hearing.
 
 HERMES 
The Academy wins by every vote but one.
 
 JUSTICE 
It is not at all surprising that there should be
one man to vote for Intemperance.

Take your seats,
you who have been drawn to hear Stoa v. Pleasure
in re a lover. The clock is filled. You with the
paint upon you and the gaudy colours, make your
plea now.

STOA 
I am not unaware, gentlemen of the jury, that I
shall have to speak against an attractive opponent ;
indeed, I see that most of you are gazing at her and
smiling at her, contemptuous of me because my head
is close-clipped, my glance is masculine, and I seem
dour. Nevertheless, if you are willing to hear me



 

speak, I am confident that my plea will be.far more
just than hers. 

 
As a matter of fact, the present charge is that by
getting herself up in this courtesan style she
beguiled my lover, Dionysius, a respectable man until
then, by the seductiveness of her appearance, and
drew him to herself. Furthermore, the suit which
your predecessors decided between the Academy and
Intemperance was the twin-sister of the present suit.
For the point at issue now is whether we should
live like swine with our noses to the ground in the
enjoyment of pleasure, without a single noble
thought, or whether, considering what is enjoyable —
secondary to what is right, we should follow
philosophy in a free spirit like free men, neither
fearing pain as invincible nor giving preference to
pleasure in a servile spirit and seeking happiness in
honey and in figs. By holding out such bait to silly
people and by making a bogey. out of pain,' my
opponent wins over the greater part of them, and
this poor man is one; she made him run away from
me by keeping an eye upon him until he was ill, for
while he was well he would never have accepted her
arguments. 

 
After all, why should I be indignant at her? Forsooth, she does not even let the gods alone, but
_slanders their management of afffirs! If you are
wise, then, you will give her a sentence for impiety
also. I hear, too, that she is not even prepared to
plead in person, but will have Epicurus appear as her
illustrating the point that Cicero makes in the T'uscwlans
(ii. 15): Haec duo (te. laborem et dolorem) Graeci illi,
quorum copiosior est lingua quam’ nostra, uno nomine appellant . . . O verborum inops interdum, quibus abundare te
semper putas, Graecia !

 

advocate, such contempt does she show the court! ;
But see here—ask her what kind of men she thinks
Heracles and your own Theseus would have been if
they had allied themselves to Pleasure and had
shirked pain and toil. Nothing would hinder the
earth from being full of wrong-doing if they had
not toiled painfully. 

 
This is all I have to say, for I am not at all fond
of long speeches. But if she should consent to let
me put questions and to give a brief reply to each, it
would very soon be evident that she amounts to
nothing. However, remember your oath and vote in
accordance with it now, putting no faith in Epicurus,
who says that the gods take no note of what happens
among us.
 
 JUSTICE 
Stand aside. Epicurus, speak for Pleasure.

EPICURUS 
I shall not address you at length, gentlemen of the
jury, for I myself do not need many words.
If Pleasure had used charms or philtres to constrain Dionysius, whom Stoa claims to be her lover,
to desert Stoa and to centre his regard upon her, she
might fairly have been held a sorceress and might
have been found guilty of using undue influence upon
the lovers of others. But suppose a free man in a
free city, unstopped by the laws, hating the tedium
of life with her and thinking that the happiness
which comes, she says, as the consummation of pain
is stuff and nonsense, made his escape from her
thorny, labyrinthine reasonings and ran away to
Pleasure of his own free will, cutting the meshes of


 

her logic as if they weré bonds, because he had the
spirit of a human being, not of a clod, and thought
pain painful, as indeed it is, and pleasure pleasant,
in that case would it have been right to bar him out,
plunging him head over ears into a sea of pain when
he was swimming from a wreck to a haven and
yearned for calm water—to put the poor fellow at the
mercy of her dilemmas in spite of the fact that he
was seeking asylum with Pleasure like a suppliant at
the Altar of Mercy—in order that he might climb
“the steep” with copious sweat, cast eyes upon
that famous Virtue, and then, after toiling painfully
his whole life long, be happy when life is over? 

 
Who should be considered a better judge than this
man himself, who knew the teachings of Stoa if ever
a man did, and formerly thought that only what was
right was good, but now has learnt that pain is bad,
and so has chosen what he has determined to be the
better? He saw, no doubt, that her set make a
great deal of talk about fortitude and endurance
of pain, but privately pay court to Pleasure; that
they are bold as brass in the lecture-room, but live
under the laws of Pleasure at home; that they
are ashamed, of course, to let themselves be seen
“lowering their pitch” and playing false to their
tenets, but suffer the tortures of Tantalus, poor
fellows, so that wherever they think they will be unobserved and can transgress their laws with safety,
they eagerly glut themselves with pleasure. In fact,
if they should be given the ring of Gyges, so that
they could put it on and be unseen, or the Cap of
Darkness, without a doubt they would bid good-bye


 

to pain for ever and would go crowding after
Pleasure, one and all, imitating Dionysius who, until
he was ill, expected to get some benefit from their
discourses about fortitude, but when he encountered
suffering and illness, and pain came closer home to
him, he perceived that his body was contradicting
Stoa and maintaining the opposite side. So he put
more trust in it than in her set, decided that he was
‘aman, with the body of a man, and thenceforward
treated it otherwise than as if it were a statue, well.
aware that whoever maintains any other view and
accuses Pleasure

 
 
 Doth like to talk, but thinks as others do! 
 
 Euripides, Phoenissae360. 
 

I have done. Cast your ballots with this understanding of the case.

STOA 
No, no! Let me cross-question him a little.
 
 EPICURUS 
Put your questions: I will answer them.
 
 STOA 
Do you consider pain bad?
 
 EPICURUS 
Yes.
 
 STOA 
And pleasure good ?
 
 EPICURUS 
Certainly.
 
 STOA 
Well, do you know the meaning of “material” and
“immaterial,” of ‘approved” and “disapproved” ? 




 

 EPICURUS 
Certainly.
 
 HERMES 
Stoa, the jurors say they can’t understand these
dissyllabic questions, so be silent ; they are voting.
 
 STOA 
I should have won if I had put him a question in
the form of the “third indemonstrable.” 
 JUSTICE 
Who won?
 
 HERMES 
Pleasure, unanimously.
 
 STOA 
I appeal to Zeus!
 
 JUSTICE 
Good luck to you! Hermes, call another case.

HERMES 
Virtue v. High-living, im re Aristippus. Let Aristippus appear in person.
 
 VIRTUE 
I ought to speak first ; I am Virtue, and Aristippus
belongs to me, as his words and his deeds indicate.
HIGH-LIVING
No, indeed ; I ought to speak first; I am High-living, and the man is mine, as you can see from his
garlands, his purple cloak and his perfumes.



 

 JUSTICE 
Do not wrangle; this case will stand over until
Zeus decides the case of Dionysius, for this seems to
be similar. Consequently, if Pleasure wins, Highliving shall have Aristippus, but if Stoa prevails, he
shall be adjudged to Virtue. So let others appear.
Look here, though—these jurors are not to get the
fee, for their case has not come to trial.
 
 HERMES 
Then are they to have come up here for nothing,
old as they are, and the hill so high?
 
 JUSTICE 
It will be enough if they get a third. Go your
ways; don’t be angry, you shall serve another day.

HERMES 
It is time for Diogenes of Sinope to appear. Make
your complaint, Banking.
 
 DIOGENES 
I protest, if she does not stop bothering me,
Justice, it will not be running away that she will
have me up for, but aggravated assault and battery,
for I shall mighty soon.take my staff and. .. .
 
 JUSTICE 
What have we here? Banking has run away, and
he is making after her with his stick raised. The
poor creature is likely to catch it pretty badly! Call
Pyrrho,

HERMES 
Painting is here, Justice, but Pyrrho has not come
up at all. It might have been expected that he
would do this.
 
 JUSTICE 
Why, Hermes?
 
 HERMES 
Because he does not believe there is any true
standard of judgment.
 
 JUSTICE 
Then let them bring in a verdict by default
against him. Now call the speech-writer, the Syrian.
After all, it was only recently that the writs were
lodged against him, and there was no pressing need
to have tried the cases now. However, since that
point has been decided, introduce the suit of Oratory
first. Heavens, what a crowd has come together for
the hearing!
 
 HERMES 
Naturally, Justice. The case is not stale, but new
and unfamiliar, having been entered only yesterday,
as you said, and they hope to hear Oratory and
Dialogue bringing charges in turn and the Syrian
defending himself against both; this has brought
crowds to court. But do begin your speech, Oratory.

ORATORY 
In the first place, men of Athens, I pray the
gods and goddesses one and al] that as much good
will as I steadily entertain toward the city and
toward all.of you may be shown me by you in this
case, and secondly that the gods may move you to do
what is above all the just thing to do—to bid my

 

opponent hold his tongue and to let me make the
complaint in the way that I have preferred and
chosen. I cannot come to the same conclusion when
I contemplate my own experiences and the speeches
that I hear, for the speeches that he will make to
you will be as like as can be to mine, but his
actions, as you shall see, have gone so far that
measures must be taken to prevent my experiencing
worse injury at his hands . . . But not to prolong
my introduction when the water has been running
freely this long time, I will begin my complaint.

When this man was a mere boy, gentlemen of the
jury, still speaking with a foreign accent and I might
almost say wearing a caftan in the Syrian style, I
found him still wandering about in Ionia, not
knowing what to do with himself; so I took him in
hand and gave him an education. As it seemed to
me that he was an apt pupil and paid strict attention
to me—for he was subservient to me in those days
and paid court to me and admired none but me—I
turned my back upon all the others who were suing
for my hand, although they were rich and goodlooking and of splendid ancestry, and plighted myself
to this ingrate, who was poor and insignificant and
young, bringing him a considerable dowry consisting
in many marvellous speeches. Then, after we were
married, I got him irregularly registered among my
own clansmen and made him a citizen, so that those who had failed to secure my hand in marriage choked
with envy. When he decided to go travelling in
order to show how happily married he was, I did not


 

desert him even then, but trailed up and down after
him everywhere and made him famous and renowned
by giving him finery and dressing him out. On our
travels in Greece and in Ionia I do not lay so much
emphasis ; but when he took a fancy to go to Italy,
I crossed the Adriatic with him, and at length I
journeyed with him as far as Gaul, where I made
him rich. 

 
For a long time he took my advice in everything
and lived with me constantly, never spending a
single night away from home:

but when he had laid
in plenty of the sinews of war and thought that he
was well off for reputation, he became supercilious
and vain and neglected me, or rather deserted
me completely. Having conceived an inordinate
affection for that bearded man in the mantle,
Dialogue, who is said to be the son of Philosophy
and is older than he is, he lives with him. Showing
no sense of shame, he has curtailed the freedom and
the range of my speeches and has confined himself
to brief, disjointed questions: and instead of saying
whatever he wishes in a powerful voice, he fits
together and spells out short paragraphs, for which
he cannot get hearty praise or great applause from
his hearers, but only a smile, or a restrained gesture
of the hand, an inclination of the head, or a sigh to
point his periods. That is the sort of thing this
gallant gentleman fell in love with, despising me!
They say, too, that he is not at peace with this
favourite, either, but insults him in the same way.

Is he not, then, ungrateful and subject to punishment under the laws that concern desertion, inasmuch
as he so disgracefully abandoned his lawful wife,
from whom he received so much and through whom
he is famous, and sought a new arrangement, now
of all times, when I alone am admired and claimed
as patroness by everyone? For my part I hold out
against all those who court me, and when they
knock at my door and call my name at the top
of their lungs, I have no desire either to open or to
reply, for I see that they bring with them nothing
but their voices. But this man even then does not
come back to me: no, he keeps his eyes upon his
favourite. Ye gods, what good does he expect to
get from him, knowing that he has nothing but his
short cloak ?
I have finished, gentlemen of the jury. But I beg
you, if he wishes to make his defence in my style
of speaking, do not permit that, for it -would be
unkind to turn my own weapon against me; let
him defend himself, if he can, in the style of his
favourite, Dialogue.
 
 HERMES 
That is unreasonable. It is not possible, Oratory,
for him, all by himself, to make his defence after
Dialogue’s manner. Let him make a speech as
you did.

THE SYRIAN
Gentlemen of the jury, as my opponent was
indignant at the thought of my using a long
speech when I acquired my power of speaking from
her, I shall not say much to you, but shall simply
answer the main points of her complaint and then

 

leave it to you to weigh the whole question. In all
that she told about me she told the truth. She
gave me an education and went abroad with me and
had me enfranchized as a Greek, and on this
account, at least, I am grateful to her for marrying
me. Why I left her and took to my friend here,
Dialogue, listen, gentlemen of the jury, and you
shall hear; and do not imagine that I am telling
any falsehood for the sake of advantage.

Seeing that she was no longer modest and did not
continue to clothe herself in the respectable way
that she did once when Demosthenes took her to
wife, but made herself up, arranged her hair like a
courtesan, put on rouge, and darkened her eyes
underneath, I became suspicious at once and secretly
took note where she directed her glances. I pass
over everything else, but every night our street was
full of maudlin lovers coming to serenade her,
knocking at the door, and sometimes even
venturing to force an entrance in disorderly fashion.
She herself laughed and enjoyed these performances,
and generally, when she heard them singing lovesongs in a hoarse voice, she either peeped over the
edge of the roof or else even slyly opened the
windows, thinking that I would not notice it, and
then. wantoned and intrigued with them. I could
not stand this, and as I did not think it best to
bring an action for divorce against her on the ground
of adultery, I went to Dialogue, who lived near by,
and requested him to take me in.

That is the great injustice that I have done
Oratory. After all, even if she had not acted as she
did, it would have been proper that I, a man already
about forty years of age, should take my leave of her

 

stormy scenes and lawsuits, should let the gentlemen
of the jury rest in peace, refraining from accusations
of tyrants and laudations of princes, and should
betake myself to the Academy or the Lyceum to
walk about with this excellent person . Dialogue
while we converse quietly without feeling any need
of praise and applause.
Though I have much to say, I will stop now.
Cast your vote in accordance with your oath.
(The votes are counted.)
 
 JUSTICE 
Who is the winner?
 
 HERMES 
The Syrian, with every vote but one.
 
 JUSTICE 
Very likely it was a public speaker who cast the
vote against him.

Let Dialogue plead before the
same jury. (To the Jurors) Wait, and you shall get
double pay for the two cases.
 
 DIALOGUE 
For my part, gentlemen of the jury, I should prefer
not to make you along speech, but to discuss the
matter a little at a time, as is my wont. Nevertheless I will make my complaint in the way that is
customary in courts of law, although I am completely
uninformed and inexperienced in such matters. Please
consider this my introduction.
The wrongs done me and the insults put upon me
by this man are these. I was formerly dignified, and
pondered upon the gods and nature and the cycle of
the universe, treading the air high up above the


 

clouds where “great Zeus in heaven driving his
winged car” sweeps on; but he dragged me down
when I was already soaring above the zenith. and
mounting on “heaven’s back,” and broke my wings,
putting me on the same level as the common herd.
Moreover, he took away from me the respectable
tragic mask that I had, and put another upon me that
is comic, satyr-like, and almost ridiculous. Then he
unceremoniously permed me up with Jest and Satire
and Cynicism and Eupolis and Aristophanes, terrible
men for mocking all that is holy and scoffing at all
that is right. At last he even dug up and thrust in
upon me Menippus, a prehistoric dog, with a very
loud bark, it seems, and sharp fangs, a really dreadful
dog who bites unexpectedly because he grins when
he bites.
Have I not been dreadfully maltreated, when I no
longer occupy my proper réle but play the comedian
and the buffoon and act out extraordinary plots for
him? What is most monstrous of all, I have been
turned into a surprising blend, for I am neither afoot
nor ahorseback, neither prose nor verse, but seem
to my hearers a strange phenomenon made up of.
different elements, like a Centaur.

HERMES 
What are you going to say to this, Master Syrian?
THE SYRIAN
Gentlemen of the jury, the suit that I am contesting now before you is unexpected. In fact, I should





 

have looked for anything else in the world sooner than
that Dialogue should say such things about. me.
When I took him in hand, he was still dour, as
most people thought, and had been reduced to a
skeleton through continual questions. In that guise
he seemed awe-inspiring, to be sure, but not in
any way attractive or agreeable to the public. So
first of all I got him into the way of walking on the
ground like a human being; afterwards by washing
off all his accumulated grime and forcing him to
smile, I made him more agreeable to those who saw
him: and on top of all that, I paired him with
Comedy, and in this way too procured him great
favour from his hearers, who formerly feared his
prickles and avoided taking hold of him as if he
were a sea-urchin. 

 
I know, however, what hurts him most. It is
that I do not sit and quibble with him about those
obscure, subtle themes of his, like “whether the soul
is immortal,” and “when God made the world, how
many pints of pure, changeless substance he poured
into the vessel in which he concocted the universe,” 
and “whether rhetoric is the false counterpart of a
subdivision of political science, the fourth form of
parasitic occupation.” Somehow he delights in
dissecting such problems, just as people like to scratch
where it itches. Reflection is sweet to him, and he
sets great store by himself if they say that not everyone can grasp his penetrating speculations about
“ideas.” 

 
That is what he expects of me, naturally ; and he
demands those wings of his and gazes on high without



 

seeing what lies at his feet. As far as the rest of
it goes, he cannot complain, I am sure, that I have
stripped him of that Greek mantle and shifted him
into a foreign one, even though I myself am considered foreign. Indeed I should be doing wrong to
transgress in that way against him. and to steal away
his native costume.
I have made the best defence that I can. Please
cast the same ballot as before.
(The votes are counted.)

HERMES 
Well, well! You win by all of ten votes! The
same one who voted against you before will not
vote as the rest even now. Without doubt it is a
habit, and the man always casts the ballot that has a
hole in it. I hope he will keep onenvying men of
standing. Well, go your ways, and good luck to you.
To-morrow we shall try the rest of the cases.