INTRODUCTION 
 
					There seems to be no reason to discuss this little work
					in detail, since F. H. Sandbach has shown conclusively that it cannot be genuine. Still more might
					be added to his proofs, sound and thorough as they
					are; but this is not the place to slay the slain. It is
					the more to be regretted that Ziegler, in the article
					on Plutarch in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopädie , has
					not had access to Sandbach’s work, though he does
					refer to Xylander’s athetesis, only to reject it, and
					might have mentioned Meziriacus’ as well.
				 
 
					Sandbach well observes: To write an exercise
						on the comparative utility of fire and water may
						seem so difficult to us moderns who do not have such
						tasks as part of our education, that we do not recognize how badly the topic is here handled... While
						it is possible that Plutarch wrote this work as a parody,
						or when a schoolboy, or under some strange circumstances, yet... the most probable view is that a
						miserable sophistical exercise on the subject Whether
						fire or water is more useful was fathered on the author
						of a diversion entitled Whether land- or water-animals
						are more intelligent , just as the Consolatio ad Apollonium 
						
						 
						
						was ascribed to the author of a consolation addressed
						to his wife, or the Lives of the Ten Orators to the author
						of some more famous biographies. 
				 
 
					The text is extremely bad, as may be seen by
					examining Wegehaupt’s topheavy apparatus in
					 Χάριτες 
 für Friedrich Leo (Berlin, Weidmann, 1911)?
					pp. 158-169- It is possible, to be sure, that part at
					least of the difficulty of the text is due to the author.
					Less emendation than that admitted here might not
					seriously damage what is irreparable nonsense in any
					case. Some attempt has been made to reproduce the
					childish style of the original.
				 
 
					The work is no. 206 in the catalogue of Lamprias.

Water is best, but gold is a flaming fire, 
					says Pindar. He, therefore, bluntly assigns the
					second place to fire; and Hesiod agrees with him
					in the words
					 And first of all came Chaos into being; 
					for most people believe that this is his name for water
					because it flows ( chysis ). Yet the balance of witnesses on both sides seems to be equal. There are,
					in fact, some who state that fire is the first principle
					of the universe and, like a seed, creates everything out
					of itself and receives all things into itself when the
					conflagration occurs. Ignoring the authors, let us
					examine the arguments on both sides and see where
					they will lead us.

Is not that element the more useful of which
					most of all, everywhere, invariably, we stand in need
					as a household tool and, I swear, a friend, ready to
					help us at any time, in any emergency? Yet fire is
					
					 
					
					not always useful; sometimes, indeed, we find it too
					much and interrupt our use of it. But water is used
					both winter and summer, sick and well, night and
					day: there is no time when a man does not need it.
					That, of course, is the reason why the dead are called
					 alibantes , meaning that they are without libas , moisture, 
 and for lack of that deprived of life. Man
					has often existed without fire, but without water
					never. Besides, that which, from the beginning,
					was coincidental with the inception of man is more
					useful than that which was discovered later; for it
					is obvious that Nature bestowed the one as vitally
					necessary, while the other was brought to light by
					luck or contrivance for a superfluous use. Now, none
					may tell of a time when water was unknown to man,
					nor is any god or hero said to be its discoverer; it
					was, in fact, at hand instantly when man appeared
					and was itself the cause of his appearance. But the
					use of fire, they say, was discovered only a day or
					twro ago by Prometheus; (consequently all our preceding life was deprived of) fire, though it was not
					without water. And that this is no poetic fiction is
					proved by present modes of living; for there are
					certain races of man who live without fire, with no
					house or hearth, under the open sky. And Diogenes 
					the Cynic reduced the use of fire to a minimum, so
					that he even swallowed a squid raw, remarking,
					 Thus, gentlemen, do I risk my life for you. But
					
					 
					
					without water no one ever thought it good, or even
					possible, to live.

And why do I split hairs by discussing merely
					human nature? For though there are many, or
					rather countless, sorts of creatures, man is practically
					the only one that knows the use of fire, while all the
					others live and feed without it: they subsist, whether
					they range abroad or fly or crawl, upon roots or produce or flesh, all without fire; but without water no
					creature of the sea or land or air ever existed. For
					even flesh-eating animals, some of which Aristotle 
					says do not drink, nevertheless keep alive by using
					the fluids in the flesh. That element, therefore,
					without which no living nature can subsist or endure
					is the more useful.

Let us pass from the people who use fire to the
					things that we use, namely plants and produce, of
					which some are completely devoid of heat, while
					others have an infinitesimal and uncertain amount.
					Moisture, however, is the element in nature that
					makes them all burgeon, growing and bearing fruit.
					And why should I enumerate honey and wine and
					oil and all the rest that come to us from the vintage,
					the milking of herds, or taking off of honey - and it
					is obvious where they belong - when even wheat
					itself, though it is classed as a dry food, moves into
					the category of liquids by alteration, fermentation,
					and deliquescence?

Moreover, what is never detrimental is more
					
					 
					
					useful. Now fire, when it forms a stream, is most
					destructive; but the nature of water is never harmful.
					Then again, of two elements that is more beneficial
					which is cheaper and provides its help without any
					preparation. Now the use of fire requires a supply
					of fuel, for which reason rich people have more of
					it than poor, and kings than private persons; but
					water has another merit in service to man, that of
					equality, with no discrimination. For it needs no
					tools or implements, being a self-sufficient, self-fulfilling good.

Then too, that which by multiplication destroys
					its own contribution is the less useful. Such a thing
					is fire which, like an all-devouring beast, consumes
					everything near, so that it is useful rather by skilful
					handling and craft and moderation in use than by
					its own nature; but water is never dangerous.
					Further, of two things the one which may be joined
					with its fellow is more useful. Now fire does not admit
					moisture and is of no use when in conjunction with
					it; but water is of service when combined with fire,
					for hot water is healing and well adapted to medicinal
					purposes. A watery fire you will never see; but
					water is as useful to mankind when hot as when cold.

Furthermore, though there are but four elements, water provides from itself a fifth, so to say,
					the sea, one no less beneficial than the others, especially for commerce among other things. This element,
					therefore, when our life was savage and unsociable,
					linked it together and made it complete, redressing
					defects by mutual assistance and exchange and so
					
					 
					
					bringing about co-operation and friendship. Now
					Heraclitus declares, If there were no sun, it would
						be perpetual night ; in the same way we may say
					that if there were no sea, man would be the most
					savage and destitute of all creatures. But as it is,
					the sea brought the Greeks the vine from India, from
					Greece transmitted the use of grain across the sea,
					from Phoenicia imported letters as a memorial
					against forgetfulness, thus preventing the greater
					part of mankind from being wineless, grainless, and
					unlettered. How, then, should water not be more
					useful when it has the advantage over fire of one more
					element?

What could anyone find to say on the other side
					from this point on? This, that God, the master workman, had as material four elements from which to
					construct the universe. Among these, again, there
					is a simple mutual distinction, namely, that earth
					and water are a foundation at the bottom of the
					universe, being, like raw material, the substance of
					which things are constructed and moulded, having
					just so much form and organization, and indeed of
					capacity for growth and procreation, as is imparted
					to them by the other elements, air and fire, which
					are makers and artisans and rouse them, lying lifeless
					as they were until then, to the act of creation. Between these two, again, fire and air, there is the distinction that fire assumes the rule and leadership.
					This is clear by induction : earth without warmth
					
					 
					
					is barren and unfruitful, but fire, when it takes
					possession and inflames, causes it to swell to the
					point of generation; and it is impossible to find anyother reason why rocks and the bare bones of mountains are barren except that they have either no part
					at all, or very little share, in fire.

And, in general, water is so far from being selfsufficient for the preservation or generation of other
					things that the want of fire is water’s destruction.
					For heat maintains everything in its proper being and
					keeps it in its proper substance, water itself as well
					as everything else. When fire withdraws and fails,
					water putrefies: the dearth of heat is the death and
					destruction of water. It is, of course, marsh waters
					and such as are stagnant, some too that have drained
					into depressions with no outlet, that are bad and
					finally putrefy because they have very little motion,
					which preserves everything by stirring up its heat.
					This is the reason why we commonly say that those
					waters are living which have most motion and
					the strongest current; the heat is maintained by
					their motion. How, then, should that not be the more
					useful of two things which has provided what is
					necessary for the other’s existence, as fire does for
					water? And surely that is the more useful, the lack
					of which, if it be entirely taken away, causes the
					living creature to die. For it is obvious that anything
					without which a creature cannot live must have been
					a necessary cause of its existence, while it did exist.
					Now even corpses have moisture which does not
					entirely vanish; otherwise dead bodies would not
					
					 
					
					putrefy, since putrefaction is not a change from dry
					to moist, but rather a corruption of the moisture in
					flesh. Death, then, is nothing but the total disappearance of heat and so dead men are extremely cold;
					if you attack them with a razor-blade, you will blunt
					the edge of it through excess of cold. In the living
					creature itself, too, the parts that have the least heat
					are the least sensitive, like bones and hair and the
					parts that are a long way from the heart. And, in
					general, the presence of fire makes a greater difference than that of moisture; for it is not mere
					moisture that produces plants and fruits, but warm
					moisture; cold water, of course, is either less productive or not productive at all. Yet if by its own
					nature water were fruitful, it would always bear fruit
					by itself b; but on the contrary it is even harmful.

To begin again: for the use of fire as fire we
					do not need water; on the contrary, it would be in
					our way since it extinguishes and destroys it. But
					in most circumstances it is impossible to use water
					without fire. When water is heated, it is more useful;
					otherwise it is harmful. And it is heat which has
					made the sea more beneficial, its waters being warmer,
					since it differs from other waters in no other respect. 
					So that of two things, that is better which of itself
					lends us its use without need of the other. Besides,
					
					 
					
					water is solely beneficial to the touch, when you wash
					or bathe in it; but fire is profitable to all the senses.
					It can, in fact, both be touched and seen from a
					distance, so that in addition to its other uses, there
					is also its variegated character.

For to say that man ever exists without fire
					is absurd, nor can he exist at all without it; but
					there are differences in kind as in other things. As
					for men who have no need of fire from without, they
					have this experience not because they do not need it,
					but because their own heat more than suffices. This
					must be predicated also of other animals which do
					not need fire. So that in this respect, too, the use
					of fire is probably superior. Water is never in such
					a condition as to need no external support, but fire
					is self-sufficient because of its great excellence. As,
					then, a general is better who manages the affairs of
					his city so that it needs no allies from without, so
					also an element is superior which does not often need
					external assistance.
				 
 
					Yet, to take the opposite point of view, that is more
					useful which we alone make great use of, since by
					the powers of our reason we are able to choose what
					is better. For what is more useful and more profitable
					to man than reason? But brute beasts do not have
					it. What then? Is what has been discovered by the
					foresight of our better part for this reason less useful?

And since we have arrived at this point in our
					argument: What is more profitable to life than Art?
					And it was fire that discovered and still preserves all
					the arts. That is why they make Hephaestus the
					first of artificers. Man has been granted but a little
					time to live and, as Ariston says, sleep, like a taxcollector, takes away half of that. But I would rather
					say that it is a question of darkness; for although
					a man might stay awake all night, yet no good would
					come of his wakefulness if fire did not give him the
					benefits of day and remove the difference between
					day and night. If, then, there is nothing more
					advantageous to man than life and life is many times
					increased by fire, how should fire not be the most
					useful of all things?

And, to be sure, will not that be the most
					advantageous of which each of the senses has the
					greatest proportion? Do you not perceive, then,
					that there is no one of the senses which uses moisture
					by itself without an admixture of air or fire; and that
					every sense partakes of fire inasmuch as it supplies
					the vital energy; and especially that sight, the
					keenest of the physical senses, is an ignited mass
					of fire and is that which has made us believe in the
					gods? And further, through sight, as Plato says,
					we are able to conform our souls to the movements
					of the celestial bodies.