INTRODUCTION 
					 Again we have a fragment, mutilated at the beginning and the end. The attribution to Plutarch
						has been questioned by Dübner, Hense, Naber,
						and Hartman, but on insufficient grounds, which have, in the main,
						been explained away by Siefert, who has also analysed the structure of the
						work and the Plutarchean parallels. Wilamowitz, on the other
						hand, believed this and the following fragment to be scraps of the same
						dialogue: I follow Pohlenz in rejecting this view. 
					 
					 The text is not good, and the work is not mentioned in the Lamprias
						catalogue.

... He will not
						submit to (such a marriage) 
						 His body bartered for the dower's sake, as
							Euripides says; but he has only a
						slight and precarious reason for being envied. For this man (it were
							better) to make his journey, not through
							heaps of hot cinders, but through a royal
							conflagration, as it were, and surrounded by flames, panting and
						full of terror and drenched with sweat, and so to perish, though (his
							mother) had offered to him such a wealth as Tantalus had, which
						he was too busy to enjoy. For while that Sicyonian horsebreeder was a wise
						man, who gave to the king of the Achaeans,
						Agamemnon, a swift mare as a gift, 
							 That he might not follow him to wind-swept Troy, 
							 But stay at home and take his pleasure, 
							 
						 surrendering himself to the enjoyment of deep riches and to
						unmolested ease; yet modern courtiers who are looked upon as men of
						affairs, though no one summons them, of their own accord push their way
						headlong into courts and official escorts and toilsome bivouacs that they
						may get a horse or a brooch or some such piece of good fortune. 
							 His wife, rending both cheeks, was left behind 
							 In Phylace, and his half-finished home, 
							 
						 while he himself is swept about and wanders afar, worn out by one
						hope after another and constantly insulted; and even if he obtains any of
						his desires, yet, whirled about and made giddy by Fortune's ropedance, he
						seeks to make his descent and considers happy those who live in obscurity
						and safety, whereas they so regard him as they look up at him soaring above
						their heads.

Vice makes all men completely miserable, since as a creator of unhappiness it
						is clothed with absolute power, for it has no need of either instruments or
						ministers. But whereas despots, when they desire to make miserable those
						whom they punish, maintain executioners and torturers, or devise
						branding-irons and wedges ; vice, without any apparatus, when it has joined itself to the soul,
						crushes and overthrows it, and filis the man with grief and lamentation,
						dejection and remorse. And this is the proof: many are silent under
						mutilation and endure scourging and being tortured by the wedge at the hands
						of masters or tyrants without uttering a cry, whenever by the application of
						reason the soul abates the pain and by main force, as it were, checks and
						represses it ; but you cannot order
						anger to be quiet nor grief to be silent, nor can you persuade a man
						possessed by fear to stand his ground, nor one suffering from remorse not to
						cry out or tear his hair or smite his thigh. So much more violent is vice
						than either fire or sword.

Cities, as we know, when they give public notice of intent to let contracts
						for the building of temples or colossal statues, listen to the proposals of
						artists competing for the commission and bringing in their estimates and
							models, and then choose the man who will do the same work with the least
						expense and better than the others and more quickly. Come, then, let us
						suppose that we also give public proclamation of intent to contract for
						making a life wretched, and that Fortune and Vice come to get the commission
						in a rival spirit. Fortune is provided with all manner of instruments and
						costly apparatus to render a life miserable and wretched; she brings in her
						train frightful robberies and wars, the foul bloodthirstiness of tyrants, and storms at sea and thunder from the
						sky; she compounds hemlock, she carries swords, she levies informers, she
						kindles fevers, she claps on fetters, and builds prison-enclosures (and yet
						the greater part of these belong to Vice rather than to Fortune, but let us
						suppose them all Fortune's). And let Vice stand by quite unarmed, needing no
						external aid against the man, and let her ask Fortune how she intends to
						make man wretched and dejected: 
							 
								 Fortune, 
								 Do you threaten poverty? Metrocles laughs at you, 
								 
							 Metrocles, who in winter slept among the sheep and in summer in
							the gateways of sacred precincts, yet challenged to vie with him in
							happiness the king of the Persians who winters in Babylon and summers in
								Media. Do you
							bring on slavery and chains and the auction block? Diogenes despises you, for when he was being
							sold by pirates, he cried out with the voice of an auctioneer,
							 Who wants to buy a master? Do you mix a cup of
							poison? Did you not present this to Socrates also? And cheerfully and
							calmly, without trembling or changing either colour or posture, he
							drained it with great cheerfulness; and as he died the living esteemed
							him happy, believing that
							 not even in Hades would he be without some god-given
							portion. And as for your fire, Decius the Roman general
							anticipated it, when he built a funeral pyre
							between the camps and, to fulfil a vow, sacrificed himself to Saturn on
							behalf of Rome's supremacy. And among the Indians, loving and chaste
							wives strive and contend with one another for the fire, and the wife who
							wins the honour of being consumed together with her dead husband is
							hymned as happy by the others. And of the wise men in that
							part of the world, not one is considered enviable or happy, if, while he
							yet lives and is sane and healthy, he does not separate by fire his soul
							from his body and emerge pure from the flesh, with the mortal part
							washed away. Or will you reduce a man from splendid wealth and house and
							table and lavish living to a threadbare cloak and wallet and begging of
							his daily bread? These things were the beginning of happiness for
							Diogenes, of freedom and repute for Crates. But will you nail him to a
							cross or impale him on a stake? And what does Theodorus care whether he rots above ground or beneath? Among the
								Scythians 
							such is the manner of happy burial; and among the Hyrcanians dogs, among the Bactrians birds, devour, in accordance
							with the laws, the bodies of men, when these have met a happy
							end.

Whom, then, do these things make wretched? The unmanly and irrational, the
						unpracticed and untrained, those who retain from childhood their notions
						unchanged. Therefore Fortune is not a producer of 
						perfect unhappiness if she does not have Vice to co-operate with her. For as
						a thread saws through the bone that has been soaked in ashes and vinegar,
						and as men bend and fashion ivory when it has been made soft and pliable by
						beer, but cannot do so otherwise, so Fortune, falling upon that which is of
						itself ill-affected and soft as the result of Vice, gouges it out and inj
						ures it. And just as the Parthian poison, though harmful to no one else
						nor injurious to those who touch it and carry it about, if it is merely
						brought into the presence of wounded men, it straightway destroys them,
						since they receive its effluence because of their previous susceptibility;
						so he who is liable to have his soul crushed by Fortune must have within
						himself some festering wound of his own in order that it may make whatever
						befalls him from without pitiful and lamentable.

Is, then, Vice such a thing that it needs Fortune's help to produce
						unhappiness? How can that be? Vice does not raise up a rough and stormy sea,
						she does not gird the skirts of lonely mountains with ambushes of robbers
						along the way, she does not make clouds of hail to burst on fruitful plains,
						she does not bring in a Meletus or an Anytus or a Callixenus as accusers, she does not
						take away wealth, she does not debar from the praetorship, in order to make
						men unhappy. Yet she dismays men who are rich,
						prosperous, and heirs to fortunes; on land and on sea she insinuates
						herself into them and clings to them, sinking deep into them through evil
						lusts, firing them with anger, crushing them with superstitious fears,
						shattering them with the eyes...