LETTER TO NIGRINUS 
 Best wishes to Nigrinus from Lucian ! 

 The proverb says “An ow] to Athens!” meaning
that it would be ridiculous for anyone to bring owls
there, because they have plenty in the city. If I
wanted to display my command of language, and
were sending Nigrinus a book written for that
purpose, I should be exposing myself to ridicule
as a genuine importer of owls. But it is only
my state of mind which I wish to reveal to you, how
I feel now, and how deeply I have been moved by
your discourse. So I may fairly be acquitted even
of the charge contained in Thucydides’ saying that
ignorance makes men bold, but discourse
 
cautious,
for clearly this great hardihood of mine is not due to
ignorance alone, but also to fondness for discourse !
Good health to you !

THE WISDOM OF NIGRINUS 

 A How very lordly and exalted you are since
you came back! Really, you don’t deign to notice
us any more, you don’t associate with us, and you
don’t join in our conversations : you have changed




 

all of a sudden, and, in short, have a supercilious air.

I should be glad to find out from you how it comes
that you are so peculiar, and what is the cause of all
this? 

 B Nothing but good fortune, my dear fellow. 

 A What do you mean ? 

 B I have come back to you transformed by the
wayside into a happy and a blissful man—in the
language of the stage, “thrice blessed.” 

 A Heracles! in so short a time? 

 B Yes, truly. 

 A But what is the rest of it? What is it that
you are puffed up about? Let us enjoy something
more than a mere hint: let us have a chance to get
at the facts by hearing the whole story. 

 B Don’t you think it wonderful, in the name of
Zeus, that once a slave, I am now free! « once poor,
now rich indeed” ; once witless and befogged, now
saner?

A Why, yes! nothing could be more fmportant.
But even yet I don’t clearly understand what you
mean. 

 B Well, I made straight for Rome, wanting to
see an oculist; for I was having more and more
trouble with my eye. 

 A I know all that, and hoped you would find
an able man. 

 B As I had resolved to pay my respects to
Nigrinus the Platonic philosopher, which I had not
done for a long time, I got up early and went to his
house, and when I had knocked at the door and the
man had announced me, I was asked in. On


 

entering, I found him with a book in his hands and
many busts of ancient philosophers standing round
about. Beside him there had been placed a tablet
filled with figures in geometry and a reed globe,
made, I thought, to represent the universe.

Well, he greeted me in very friendly way and
asked me how I was getting on. I told him
everything, and naturally in my own tum wanted to
know how he was getting on, and whether he had
made up his mind to take the trip to Greece again.
Beginning:-to talk on these topics and to explain
his position, my dear fellow, he poured enough
ambrosial speech over me to put out of date the
famous Sirens
 
(if there ever were any) and the
nightingales
 and the lotus of Homer.
 A divine

utterance!

For he went on to praise philosophy
and the freedom that it gives, and to ridicule the
things that are popularly considered blessings—
wealth and reputation, dominion and honour, yes
and purple and gold—things accounted very desirable
by most men, and till then by me also. I took it all
in with eager, wide-open soul, and at the moment I
couldn’t imagine what had come over me ; I was all
confused. Then I felt hurt because he had criticised
what was dearest to me—wealth and money and
reputation,—and I all but cried over their downfall ;




 

and then I thought them paltry and ridiculous, and
was glad to be looking up, as it were, out of the
murky atmosphere of my past life to.a clear sky and
a great light. In consequence, I actually forgot my
eye and its ailment—would you believe it ?—and by
degrees grew sharper-sighted in my soul ; which, all
unawares, I had been carrying about in a purblind
condition till then.

I went on and on, and so
got into the state with which you just reproached
me: what he said has made me proud and exalted,
and in a word, I take no more notice of trifles. I
suppose I have had the same sort of experience with
philosophy that the Hindoos are said to have had
with wine when they first tasted it. As they are
by nature more hot-blooded than we, on taking such
strong drink they became uproarious at once, and
were crazed by the unwatered beverage twice as
much as other people. There you have it! I am
going about enraptured and drunk with the wine of
his discourse.

A Why, that isn’t drunkenness, it is sobriety and
temperance! I should like to hear just what he
said, if possible. It is far, very far from right, in
my opinion, to be stingy with it, especially if the
person who wants to hear is a friend and has the
same interests. 

 B Cheer up, good soul! you spur a willing horse,
as Homer says, 
and if you hadn’t got ahead of me,
I myself should have begged you to listen to my
tale, for I want to have you bear witness before the
world that my madness has reason in it. Then, too,



 

I take pleasure in calling his words to mind
frequently, and have already made it a regular
exercise : even if nobody happens to be at hand, I
repeat them to myself two or three times a day just
the same.

I am in the same case with lovers.
In the absence of the objects of their fancy they
think over their actions and their words, and by
dallying with these beguile their lovesickness into
the belief that they have their sweethearts near; in
fact, sometimes they even imagine they are chatting
with them and are as pleased with what they
formerly heard as if it were just being said, and by
applying their minds to the memory of the past give
themselves no time to be annoyed ‘by the present.
So I, too, in the absence of my mistress Philosophy,
get no little comfort out of gathering together the
words that I then heard and turning them over to
myself. In short, I fix my gaze on that man as if he
were a lighthouse and I were adrift at sea in the
dead of night, fancying him by me whenever I do
anything and always hearing him repeat his former
words. Sometimes, especially when I put pressure
on my soul, his face appears to me and the sound of
his voice abides in my ears. Truly, as the comedian
says,
 
“he left a sting implanted in his hearers!”

A Have done with your long prelude, “you
strange fellow ; begin at the beginning and tell me
what he said. You irritate me more than a little
with your beating about the bush. 

 B You are right! I must do so. But look here, _
my friend : you’ve seen bad actors in tragedy before
now—yes, and in comedy too, I'll swear? I mean
the sort that are hissed and ruin pieces and finally
get driven off the stage, though their plays are often
good and have won a prize. 

 A I know plenty of the sort. But what of it ? 

 B I am afraid that, as you follow me, you may
think that I present my lines ridiculously, hurrying
through some of them regardless of metre, and
sometimes even spoiling the very sense by my
incapacity ; and that you may gradually be led to
condemn the play itself. As far as I am concerned,
I don’t care at all; but if the play shares my failure
and comes to grief on my account, it will naturally
hurt me more than a little.

Please bear it in
mind, then, all through the performance that the
poet is not accountable to us for faults of this nature,
and’ is sitting somewhere far away from the stage,
completely unconcerned about what is going on in
the theatre, while I am but giving you a chance to
test my powers and see what sort of actor I am in
point of memory; in other respects my réle is no
more important than that of a messenger in tragedy.
Therefore, in case I appear. to be saying something
rather poor, have the excuse to hand that it was
better, and that the poet no doubt-told it differently.
As for myself, even if you hiss me off the stage, I
shan’t be hurt at all!

A Hermes ! 
what a fine introduction you have
made, just like a professor of public speaking!
You intend, I am sure, to add that your conversation
was short, that you didn’t come prepared to speak,
and that it would be better to hear him tell it himself, for really you have only carried in mind what
little you could. Weren’t you going to say that?
Well, there is no longer any necessity for it on my
account ; consider your whole introduction finished
as far as I am concerned, for I am ready to cheer
and to clap. But if you keep shilly-shallying, I'll
bear you a grudge all through the speech and will
hiss right, sharply.

B Yes, I should have liked to say all that you
mention, and also that I do not intend to quote
him without a break and in his own words, in a long
speech covering everything, for that would be quite
beyond my powers; nor yet to quote him in the first
person, for fear of making myself like the actors
whom I mentioned in another way. Time and again
when they have assumed the role of Agamemnon or
Creon or even Heracles himself, costumed in cloth
of gold, with fierce eyes and mouths wide agape,
they speak in a voice that is small, thin, womanish,
and far too poor for Hecuba or Polyxena. Therefore, to avoid being criticised like them for wearing
a mask altogether too big for my head and for being
a disgrace to my costume, I want to talk to you with
my features exposed, so that the hero whose part I
am taking may not be brought down with me if I
stumble.

A Will the man never stop talking so much
stage and tragedy to me?



 
 

 B Why, yes! I will stop, certainly, and will now
turn to my subject. The talk began with praise of
Greece and of the men of Athens, because Philosophy
and Poverty have ever been their fuster-brothers,
and they do not look with pleasure on any man, be
he citizen or stranger, who strives to introduce
luxury among them, but if ever anyone comes to
them in that frame of mind, they gradually correct
him and lend a hand in his schooling and convert
him to the simple life.

For example, he mentioned a millionaire who
came to Athens, a very conspicuous and vulgar
person with his crowd of attendants and his gay
clothes and jewelry, and expected to be envied by
all the Athenians and to be looked up to as a happy
man. But they thought the creature unfortunate,
and undertook to educate him, not in a harsh way,
however, nor yet by directly forbidding him to live
as he would in a free city. But when he made himself a nuisance at the athletic clubs and the baths by
jostling and crowding passers with his retinue,
someone or other would say in a low tone, pretending
to be covert, as if he were not directing the remark
at the man himself: “He is afraid of being
murdered in his tub! Why, profound peace reigns
in the baths; there is no need of an army, then!”
And the man, who never failed to hear, got a bit of
instruction in passing. His gay clothes and his
purple gown they stripped from him very neatly by
making fun of his flowery colours, saying, “Spring
already?” ‘How did that peacock get here f”
“Perhaps it’s his mother’s” and the like. His other
vulgarities they turned into jest in the same way—


 

the number of his rings, the over-niceness of his
hair, the extravagance of his life. So he was
disciplined little by little, and went away much
improved by the public education he had received.

To show that they are not ashamed to confess
poverty, he mentioned to me a remark which he
said he had heard everybody make with one accord
at the Panathenaic games. One of the citizens had
been arrested and brought before the director of the
games because he was looking on in a coloured cloak.
Those who saw it were sorry for him and tried to
beg him off, and when the herald proclaimed that
he had broken the law by wearing such clothing at
the games, they all cried out in one voice, as if by
pre-arrangement, to excuse him for being in that
dress, because, they said, he had no other.
Well, he praised all this, and also the freedom
there and the blamelessness of their mode of living,
their quiet and leisure; and these advantages they
certainly have in plenty. He declared, for instance,
that a life like theirs is in harmony with philosophy -
and can keep the character pure ; so that a serious
man who has been taught to despise wealth and
elects to live for what is intrinsically good will find
Athens éxactly suited to him.

But a man who
loves wealth and is enthralled by gold and measures
happiness by purple and power, who has not tasted
liberty or tested free speech or contemplated truth,
whose constant companions are flattery and servility ;
a min who has unreservedly committed his soul to
pleasure and has resolved to serve none but her,
fond of extravagant fare and fond of wine and


 

women, full of trickery, deceit and falsehood; a
man who likes to hear twanging, fluting and emasculated singing—

"Such folk,” said he, “should live
in Rome, for every street and every square is full of
the things they cherish most,
 
and they can admit
pleasure by every gate—by the eyes, by the ears
and nostrils, by the throat and reins, Its everflowing, turbid stream widens every street; it
brings in adultery, avarice, perjury and the whole
family of the vices, and sweeps the flooded soul bare
of self-respect, virtue, and righteousness; and then the
ground which they have left a desert, ever parched
with thirst, puts forth a rank, wild growth of lusts.”
That was the character of the city, he declared,
and those all the good things it taught.

“For
my part,” said he, “when I first came back from
Greece, on getting into the neighbourhood of Rome
I stopped and asked myself why I had come here,
repeating the well-known words of Homer:
 
‘Why
left you, luckless man, the light of day’—Greece,
to wit, and all that happiness and freedom— and
came to see’ the hurly-burly here—informers,
haughty greetings, dinners, flatterers, murders,
legacy-hunting, feigned friendships? And what in
the world do you intend to do, since you can neither
go away nor do as the Romans do?”

“After communing with myself in this vein and
pulling myself out of bowshot as Zeus did Hector
in Homer,

 
 
 From out the slaughter, blood, and battle-din, 
 
 Iliad 11, 163. 
 
I decided to be a stay-at-home in future. Choosing
thereby a sort of life which seems to most people
womanish and spiritless, I converse with Plato,
Philosophy and Truth, and seating myself, as it
were, high up in a theatre full of untold thousands,
I look down on what takes place, which is of a
quality sometimes to afford amusement and laughter,
sometimes to prove a man’s true steadfastness.

“Indeed (if it is right to speak in praise of what is
bad), don’t suppose that there is any better school for
virtue or any truer test of the soul than this city and
the life here; it is no small matter to make a stand
against so many desires, so many sights and sounds
that lay rival hands on a man and pull him in every
direction. One must simply imitate Odysseus and
sail past them; not, however, with his hands bound
(for that would be cowardly) nor with his ears
stopped with wax, but with ears open and body
free, and in a spirit of genuine contempt.

Furthermore, one has cause to admire philosophy when he
beholds so much folly, and to despise the gifts of
fortune when he sees on the stage of life a play of
many réles, in which one man enters first as servant,
then as master; another first as rich, then as poor;
another now as beggar, now as nabob or king;
another as So-and-so’s friend, another as his enemy ;
another as an exile. And the strangest part of it all
is that although Fortune attests that she makes light



 

of human affairs and admits that there is no stability
in them, and in spite of the fact that men see this
demonstrated every day, they still yearn for wealth
and power, and go about every one of them full of
unrealised hopes.

“But I have said that there is food for laughter
and amusement in what goes on; let me now explain
it. To begin with, are not the rich ridiculous? They
display their purple gowns and show their rings and
betray an unbounded lack of taste. Would you
believe it ?—they make use of another man’s
 
voice
in greeting people they meet, expecting them to be
thankful for a glance and nothing more, while some,
lordlier than the rest, even require obeisance to be
made to them: not at long range, though, or in the
Persian style. No, you must go up, bow your head,
humbling your soul and showing its feelings by
carrying yourself to match them, and kiss the man’s
breast or his hand, while those who are denied even
this privilege envy and admire you! And the man
stands for hours and lets himself be duped! At any
rate there is one point in their inhumanity that I
commend them for—they forbid us their lips!

“Far more ridiculous, however, than the rich are
those who visit them and pay them court. They get
up at midnight, run all about the city, let servants
bolt the doors in their faces and suffer themselves
to be called dogs, toadies and similar names. By
way of reward for this galling round of visits they
get the much-talked-of dinner, a vulgar thing, the
source of many evils. How much they eat there,


 

how much they drink that they do not want, and
how much they say that should not have been said!
At last they go away either finding fault or nursing
a grievance, either abusing the dinner or accusing
‘the host of insolence and neglectfulness. They fill
the side-streets, puking and fighting at the doors of
brothels, and most of them go to bed by daylight
and give the doctors a reason for making their
rounds. Not all, though ; for some—would you
believe it ?—haven’t even time to be ill!

“For my part I hold that the toadies are far
worse than the men they toady to, and that they
alone are to blame for the arrogance of the others.
When they admire their possessions, praise their
plate, crowd their doorways in the early morning
and go up and speak to them as a slave speaks to his
master, how can you expect the rich to feel? If by
common consent they refrained but a short time from
this voluntary servitude, don’t you think that the
tables would be turned, and that the rich would
come to the doors of the poor and beg them not to
leave their happiness unobserved and unattested and
their beautiful tables and great houses unenjoyed
and unused? It is not so much being rich that they
like as being congratulated on it. The fact is, of
course, that the man who lives in a fine house gets
no good of it, nor of his ivory and gold either, unless
someone admires it all. What men ought to do,
then, is to reduce and cheapen the rank of the rich
in this way, erecting in the face of their wealth a


 

breastwork of contempt. But as things are, they
turn their heads with servility.

“That common men who unreservedly admit
their want of culture should do such things might
fairly be thought reasonable; but that many selfstyled philosophers should act still more ridiculously
than they—this is the surprising thing! How do
you suppose I feel in spirit when I see one of them,
especially if he be well on in years, among a crowd
of toadies, at the heels of some Jack-in-office, in conference with the dispensers of his dinner-invitations ?
His dress only marks him out among the rest and
makes him more conspicuous. What irritates me
most is that they do not change their costume:
certainly they are consistent play-actors in everything else. Take their conduct at dinners—to
what ethical ideal are we to ascribe it?

Do they
not stuff themselves more vulgarly, get drunk more
conspicuously, leave the table last of all, and expect
to carry away more delicacies than anyone else?
Some, more subtle than the rest, have often gone so
far as to sing.”
All this, he thought, was ridiculous: and he made
special mention of people who cultivate philosophy
for hire and put virtue on sale over a counter, as it
were : indeed, he called the lecture-rooms of these
men factories and bazaars. For he maintained that
one who intends to teach contempt for wealth
should first of all show that he is himself above
gain.

Certainly he used to put these principles into
practice consistently, not only giving instruction
without recompense to all who desired it, but
helping the needy and holding all manner of super-

 

fluity in contempt. So far was he from coveting the
property of others that even when his own property
was going to rack and ruin he did not concern
himself about it. Although he had a farm not far
from the city, he’ did not care to set foot on it for
many years. More than this, he used to say that it
was not his at all. His idea was, I take it, that we
are not “owners” of any of these things by natural
law, but that we take over the use of them for
an indefinite period by custom and inheritance, and
are considered their proprietors for a brief space ;
and when our allotted days of grace are past
another takes them over and enjoys the title.
He likewise sets no mean example for those who
care to imitate him in his simple diet, his moderate
physical exercises, his earnest face, his plain clothes
and above all, his well-balanced understanding and
his kindly ways.

He always advised his disciples
not to postpone being good, as most people do, by
setting themselves a limit in the form of a holiday or
a festival, with the intention of beginning from that
date to shun lies and do as they should; for he
deemed that an inclination towards the higher life
brooked no delay. He made no secret of his
condemnation of the sort of philosophers who think it
a course in virtue if. they train the young to enduré
“full many pains and toils,"
 
the majority
recommending cold baths, though some whip them,
and still others, the more refined. of their sort, scrape
” the surface of their skin with a knife-blade.

It was his



 

opinion that this hardness and insensibility should
be created rather in the souls of men, and that
he who elects to give the best possible education
ought to have an eye to soul, to body, and to age
and previous training, that he may not subject
himself to criticism on the score of setting his pupils
tasks beyond their strength. Indeed, he asserted
that many die as a result of strains so unreasonable.
I myself saw one student who, after a taste of the
tribulations in that camp, had made off without a
backward glance as soon as he heard true doctrine,
and had come to Nigrinus: he was clearly the
better for it.

At length leaving the philosophers, he recurred to
the rest of mankind, and told about the uproar of
the city, the crowding, the theatres, the races, the
statues. of the drivers, the names of the horses, and
the conversations in the streets about these matters.
The craze for horses is really great, you know, and
men with a name for earnestness have caught it in
great numbers.

Next he touched upon another human comedy,
played by the people who occupy themselves with
life beyond the grave and with last wills, adding
that sons of Rome speak the truth only once in their
whole lives (meaning in their wills), in order that
they may not reap the fruits of their truthfulness !
 
I could not help interrupting him with laughter
when he said that they want to have their follies
buried with them and to leave their stupidity on
record, inasmuch as some of them leave instructions



 

that clothing be burned with them which they prized
in life, others that servants stay by their tombs,
and here and there another that his gravestone be
wreathed with flowers.

They remain foolish even
on their deathbeds.

He thought he could guess
what they had done in life when they issued such
injunctions touching the hereafter: “It is they,”
said he, “who buy expensive dainties and let wine
flow freely at dinners in an atmosphere of saffron
and perfumes, who glut themselves with roses in
midwinter, loving their rarity and unseasonableness
and despising what is seasonable and natural because
of its cheapness’; it is they who drink myrrh.” And
that was the point in which he criticised them
especially, that they do not even know how to give
play to their desires, but transgress in them and
obliterate the boundary-lines, on all sides surrendering their souls to luxury to be trodden under foot,
and as they say in tragedy and comedy, “forcing an
entrance alongside the door."
 
These he called
unidiomatic pleasures.

From the same standpoint he made a comment
exactly like that of Momus. Just as the latter found
fault with the god
 
who made the bull for not
putting the horns in front of the eyes, so he censured
those who wear garlands for not knowing where
they should go. “If it is the scent of their violets




 

and roses that they like,” he said, “they certainly
ought to put their garlands under their noses, as
close as may be to the intake of the breath, so as to
inhale the greatest possible amount of pleasure.”

Another thing, he ridiculed the men who
devote such a surprising degree of energy to dinners
in the effort to secure variety in flavours and new
effects in pastry. He said that these underwent a
great deal of inconvenience through their devotion
to a brief and temporary pleasure. Indeed, he
pointed out that all their trouble was taken for
the sake of four finger-breadths, the extent of the’
longest human throat. “Before eating,” said he,
“they get no good out of what they have bought,
_\and after eating, the sense of fulness is no more
agreeable because it derives from expensive food ; it
follows, then, that it is the pleasure of swallowing
which has cost them so dear.” And he said that it
served them right for being uneducated and consequently unfamiliar with the truer pleasures, which
are all dispensed by philosophy to those who elect
a life of toil.

He had much to say about their behaviour
in the baths—the number of their attendants, their
offensive actions, and the fact that some of them are
carried by servants almost as if they were corpses on
their way to the graveyard. There is one practice,
however, which he appeared to detest above all
others, a wide-spread custom in the city and in the
baths. It is the duty of certain servants, going in
advance of their masters, to cry out and warn them
to mind their footing when they are about to pass
something high or low, thus reminding them, oddly
enough, that they are walking! He was indignant,


 

you see, that although they do not need the mouths
or the hands of others in eating or the ears of others
in hearing, they need the eyes of others to see their
way in spite of the soundness of their own, and
suffer themselves to be given directions fit only for
unfortunates and blind men. - “Why,” said- he,
“this is actually done in public squares at midday,
even to governors of cities!”

When he had said this and much more of the ©
same sort, he ended his talk. Until then I had
listened to him in awe, fearing that he would cease.
When he stopped, I felt like the Phaeacians of old, 
for I stared at him a long time spellbound. Afterwards, in a great fit of confusion and giddiness, I
dripped with sweat, I stumbled and stuck in the
endeavour to speak, my voice failed, my tongue
faltered, and finally I began to cry in embarrassment; for the effect he produced: in me was not
superficial or casual. My wound was deep and vital,
and his words, shot with great accuracy, clove, if I
may say so, my very soul in twain.

For if I too
may now adopt the language of a philosopher,
my conception of the matter is that the soul of a
well-endowed man resembles a very tender target.
Many bowmen, their quivers full of words of all
sorts and kinds, shoot at it during life, but not with
success in every case. Some draw to the head and
let fly harder than they should: though they hit the
target, their arrows do not stick in it, but owing to



 

their momentum go through and continue their
flight, leaving only a gaping wound in the soul..
Others, again, do the opposite ; themselves too weak,
their bows too slack, the arrows do not even carry
to the target as a rule, but often fall spent at half
the distance ; and if ever they do carry, they strike
 
 
 with a mere fret o’ the skin, 
 
 Iliad 17, 599. 
 


and do not make a
deep wound, as they were not sped with a strong
pull.

But a good bowman like Nigrinus first of
all scans the target closely for fear that it may be
either very soft or too hard for his arrow—for of
course there are impenetrable targets. When he is
clear on this point, he dips his arrow, not in venom
like those of the Scythians nor in vegetable poison
like those of the Curetes, but in a sweet, gently-working drug, and then shoots with skill. The arrow,
driven by just the right amount of force, penetrates
to ghe point of passing through, and then sticks fast
and gives off a quantity of the drug, which naturally
spreads and completely pervades the soul. That is
why people laugh and cry as they listen, as I did—
of course the drug was quietly circulating in my soul.
I could not help quoting him the well-known line:
 
 
 Shoot thus, and bring, mayhap, a ray of hope! 
 
 Iliad 8, 282. 
 


Not everyone who hears the Phrygian flute goes
frantic, but only those who are possessed of ‘Rhea
and are put in mind of their condition by the music.
In, like manner, naturally, not all who listen to
philosophers go away enraptured and wounded, but
only those who previously had in their nature some
secret bond of kinship with philosophy.

A What a noble, marvellous,—yes, divine tale
you have told, my dear fellow! I did not realise it,
but you certainly were chock-full of your ambrosia
and your lotus! The coysequence is that as you
talked I felt something like a change of heart, and
now that you have stopped I am put out: to speak
in your own style, I am wounded. And no wonder!
for yeu. know that people bitten by mad dogs not:
only go mad themselves, but if in their fury they
treat others as the dogs treated them, the others
take leave of their senses too. Something of the
affection is transmitted with the bite; the diseage
multiplies, and there is a great run of-madness. 

 B Then you admit your madness? 

 A Why, certainly ; and more than that, I ask you
to think out some course of treatment for us both. 

 B We must do as Telephus did, I suppose. 

 A What’s your meaning now? 

 B Go to the man who inflicted the wound and
beg him to heal us !