Mikyllos May Zeus strike you dead,
you confounded cock, for the envy in
your heart and the clarion in your
throat! Why did you lift up your
voice and wake me when I was a
rich man in a glorious dream and revelling in
marvellous happiness? Can't you let me escape
by night either from poverty, which I hate even
worse than you? To judge from the great quiet
that still prevails it is not yet midnight. It can't
be, for I am not stiff yet with the early frost as
usual—that is my trusty clock to tell me of the
approach of day. But this sleepless beast has
begun to crow already, just at the end of the
evening, as if he were guarding the golden fleece
in the story. Not for your own good, though! I
shall certainly have my revenge when daylight
comes, and smash you with my club. You would
give me too much trouble just now, hopping about
in the dark. 


 Cock Master Mikyllos, I thought I was going
to do you a kindness by being as beforehand with
the night as I could, so that you might get up
and finish most of your work. Certainly if you


 



make one shoe before sunrise you will be so much
ahead, having accomplished this towards your
daily bread. However, if you prefer to sleep, I
will hold my tongue at your pleasure and be as
dumb as a fish; but do you look out lest by
dreaming of riches you starve when you are
awake.

Mikyllos O Zeus, god of prodigies, and Herakles, that keepest mischief from us, what is this
fearful thing? The cock spoke like a human
being! 


 Cock Does a thing of this sort strike you, then,
as a prodigy—that I should speak the same tongue
as you? 


 Mikyllos I should think it is a prodigy. But
do ye, O gods, avert misfortune from us! 


 Cock You seem to me, Mikyllos, to be actually
illiterate. Have you not read Homer's poems,
in which Achilles's horse, too, Xanthos, bade a
long farewell to neighing, and stood in the midst
of the battle and conversed, reciting whole verses,
not prose as I do now? And he prophesied, too,
and foretold coming events, and was not considered to be doing anything out of the way; nor did
he who heard him call upon the Protector against
evil as you did, thinking the sound an omen to
be averted. Moreover, what would you have
done if the keel of the Argo had spoken to you,
or if the oak of Dodona had prophesied for you


 


with its own voice, or if you
had seen skins creeping and heard the flesh of oxen lowing half-roasted on the spits? I am the coadjutor of Hermes,
who is the most loquacious and eloquent of all
the gods, and for the rest I was not likely to find
much trouble in mastering the human language,
seeing that I live with you and share your table.
But if you should promise me to keep the secret
I would not mind telling you the truer reason of
our having the same language, and how I came
to speak thus.

Mikyllos But is not this a dream, too: a cock
talking to me like this? Tell me, then, in the
name of Hermes, my friend, what other reason
there is for your gift of speech. You need not
fear that I shall break silence and tell any one,
for who would believe me if I told anything, giving out that I had heard it from a cock? 


 Cock Listen, then. I am well aware that what
I say will be most incredible to you, Mikyllos-
I who now appear to you in the guise of a cock
was not long ago a man. 


 Mikyllos I have heard something of the kind
about your race before: that a certain young
man named Cock became a friend of Ares, and
was a boon companion of the god, joined his revels, and shared his love affairs. So whenever
Ares went to see his mistress, Aphrodite, he took
Cock along, too, and, because he was suspicious


 



chiefly of the Sun, lest he should look down upon
them and tell tales to Hephaistos, he always left
the young man outside at the door to report the
rising of the Sun. On one occasion Cock fell
asleep and betrayed his post without meaning to,
and the Sun appeared unexpectedly to Aphrodite
and to Ares, taking his rest securely in his confidence that Cock would let him know if any one
approached. In this way Hephaistos learned
about them from the Sun and caught them, netting them and snaring them in the bonds which
he had wrought for them before. Ares, when he
was released, was furious against Cock, and
changed him into the bird of that name, armor
and all, so that he still has the crest of his helmet on his head; and this is the reason why,
whenever you perceive the sun about to rise you
lift up your voices long before to declare his rising, defending yourself to Ares, though it will do
you no good now.

Cock They tell that story, too; but my case
was somewhat different, and it is quite lately that
I turned into a cock, at your service. 


 Mikyllos In what way? I have the greatest
desire to know. 


 Cock Do you know by hearsay one Pythagoras,
a Samian, the son of Mnesarchos ? 


 Mikyllos Do you mean the sophist, the impostor, who made laws against tasting meat or eating


 


beans-declaring my favorite dish banished from
the table-and who moreover persuaded people
to keep silence for five years? 


 Cock Of course you know this, too, that before
he was Pythagoras he was Euphorbos? 


 Mikyllos They say that fellow was a juggler
and a conjurer. 


 Cock I myself am none other than that Pythagoras; so stop your railing at me, my friend,
particularly since you do not know what manner
of man I was. 


 Mikyllos This is an even greater prodigy than
the other, to find a cock a philosopher! However, tell me, son of Mnesarchos, how is it that
you have appeared to me as a bird instead of a
man, and a Tanagrian instead of a Samian. The
thing is incredible. I can't readily believe it, for
I think I have observed two traits in you already
very unlike Pythagoras. 


 Cock What are they? 


 Mikyllos For one thing, you are talkative and
noisy, while he, I believe, used to enjoin five whole
years of silence. And the other thing is also entirely contrary to his law, for yesterday, when I
had no food to scatter for you, I came and
brought some beans, as you know, and you did
not hesitate to pick them up.
So that either you
have lied and are somebody else, or else, if you
are Pythagoras, you have broken the law, and by


 



eating beans have committed as great an impiety
as if
you had devoured your father's head.

Cock Nay, Mikyllos, you do not know the reason of these things, nor what is suitable to each
life. Formerly I did not eat beans, because I
was a philosopher; but now I am willing to eat
them, for they are bird's food and not forbidden
to us. But come, you shall hear if you like how,
after being Pythagoras, I come to be as you see,
and what sort of lives I lived before, and what
good I got of each transformation. 


 Mikyllos Pray tell me; I should be enchanted
to listen. If some one should ask me to choose
whether I preferred to hear you tell about these
things or see that heavenly dream again that I
had a little while ago, I do not know which I
should choose. You see how nearly akin I judge
what you offer to the sweetest visions, and I hold
you both in equal esteem, you and the blessed
dream. 


 Cock What are you still pondering on your
dream, wondering who in the world it was that
appeared to you? Still cherishing certain fond
images and chasing in memory an empty and (as
the poets would say) fleeting happiness?

Mikyllos I can tell you, Cock, that I will never
forget that vision. The dream as it went left so
much honey in my eyes that I can hardly lift my
lids, for it drags them down again to sleep. You


 

know the tickling you get if you twirl a feather
in your ear; well, that is just the sensation I had
from my dream. 


 Cock By Herakles, this is a marvellous love
that you declare for a dream! They say dreams
are winged and their flight is bounded by sleep,
but this one has leaped beyond the mark and
lingers in open eyes, seeming so honey-sweet and
vivid. I should really like to hear what it was like,
since you long for it so. 


 Mikyllos I am ready to tell you, for it is a
pleasure to me to recall and describe something
of it. But when will you, Pythagoras, tell me
about your transformations? 


 Cock When you, Mikyllos, stop dreaming and
rub the honey from your eyelids.
But tell me
this first, whether your dream was sent through
the gates of ivory or the gates of horn. 


 Mikyllos Through neither, Pythagoras. 


 Cock But Homer tells of these two only. 


 Mikyllos Don't talk to me about that fool of a
poet, who knew nothing about dreams. Perhaps
poor dreams such as he used to see-not very
clearly, either, for he was blind-came through
such gates; but mine, the most beautiful, came
through golden gates, and itself was golden and
clothed all in gold, and brought heaps of gold
with it. 


 Cock Stop your tale of gold, you Midas!

Mikyllos I saw heaps of gold, Pythagorasheaps. You can't think how beautiful it was or
how radiantly it shone! What is it Pindar says
in praise of it? Remind me, if you know. He
says water is best, and then goes on to speak of
gold, placing a eulogy of it very properly at the
very beginning of the book, in the most beautiful
of all his odes. 


 Cock This is probably what you want: "Best
of all things is water, but gold-like a flaming
fire by night it blazes out from all the haughty
store of wealth." 


 Mikyllos The very thing, by Zeus! Pindar
writes this praise of gold just as if he had seen
my dream. If you wish to hear what it was like,
listen, most sagacious Cock. You know I did not
dine at home yesterday. Eukrates the millionaire
fell in with me in the market-place and bade me
come to his house after my bath in time for dinner.

Cock I know it very well, for I went hungry
all day until you came home late in the evening,
rather drunk, and brought me those five beans—
not a very ample meal for a cock who has been
an athlete in his day and competed at Olympia,
not without distinction. 


 Mikyllos Well, when I had come home from
dinner I went to sleep as soon as I had given you
the beans; and then, through the ambrosial night,
as Homer says, a really heavenly dream appeared. 


 


 Cock First, Mikyllos, tell me what happened
at Eukrates's house, and what sort of a dinner
you had, and all about the drinking-party after
it. For there is nothing to prevent your dining
again by fashioning a dream, as it were, of that
dinner, and chewing in memory the cud of what
you ate.

Mikyllos I thought I should bore you if I described that, too; but since you wish it, I will
certainly tell it. Never in all my life before, Pythagoras, had I dined with a rich man, when by
some good-fortune I chanced upon Eukrates yesterday. I addressed him as usual, with "Good-morning, sir," and said no more lest I should
mortify him by accompanying him in my shabby
clothes. But he said, “Mikyllos, I am celebrating my daughter's birthday to-day, and I have
asked a good many friends. Now I hear that
one of them is poorly and not able to dine with
me, so come yourself in his place after your bath,
unless, indeed, the man I invited sends word
finally that he will come. At present he is undecided."
When I heard this I made him a low bow and
went off praying to all the gods to send a fever of
some sort, or a pleurisy, or the gout, to that invalid whose successor and substitute I had been
asked to be. The interval before bathing seemed
ages long, because I was forever looking to see


 



what o'clock it was and at what hour one ought
to have had his bath. And as soon as the time
came I scrubbed myself in a hurry, and went
off dressed with great propriety, having so adjusted my tunic that the cleaner part might be
thrown over my shoulder.

At the door I found
a crowd, and among them, carried by four men in
a litter, the man in whose stead I was to have
dined, the one that was said to be ill, and indeed
he was evidently in a bad way, for he groaned a
little and had a slight cough, and cleared his
throat from far down and with difficulty. He was
of a uniform yellow and bloated, and nearly sixty
years old. He was said to be a philosopher of
the school that talks nonsense to boys. At all
events, he wore a goat-like beard of an absurd
length; and when Archibios, the doctor, blamed
him for having come in this condition, he said,
"Duty must be done, above all by a philosopher,
even though a thousand diseases stand in the
way; for Eukrates would think I held him lightly.”
"Not at all," said I. "On the contrary, he will
commend you if you prefer dying at home by
yourself to coughing up your soul at the dinner."
To preserve his dignity he pretended that he
had not heard the scoff. Presently Eukrates appeared from the bath, and when he saw Thesmopolis- for that was the philosopher's name
"Professor," said he, “it is kind of you to come


 

to me.
Still you would have lost nothing if you
had stayed away, for your dinner would have been
sent to you course by course."
As he spoke he entered the house, leading
Thesmopolis by the hand, who was also supported by his servants.

Accordingly I got ready to
take myself off, but Eukrates turned round and
after a good deal of hesitation said, when he saw
me looking very downcast, "Come along, too,
Mikyllos, and dine with us. I will tell my son to
have his supper with his mother in the nursery so
that there may be a place for you."
So I went in like a wolf who has almost lost
his
prey, ashamed that they should think I had
driven Eukrates's boy from the table. When it
was time to take our places on the couches, they
first lifted Thesmopolis and set him up. It was
no small job, by Zeus ! for five—I think it was five
-well-grown young men, and they stuffed cushions in all round him to keep him in position and
enable him to hold out a long time. Then, as
nobody could endure to sit near him, they took
me and deposited me beside him, so that we
were neighbors. Thereupon we dined, Pythagoras, and had a bountiful and varied dinner off
abundance of silver and gold. There were golden goblets, and the waiters were beautiful boys,
and between the courses there were singing-girls
and clowns, and on the whole the entertainment


 



was delightful. The only drawback was that
Thesmopolis gave me a good deal of trouble by
boring me and talking to me about the "higher
life," and instructing me that two negatives make
an affirmative, and that if it is day it is not night,
and sometimes he even proved that I had horns.
He strung together a great deal more of such
philosophy for me, quite gratuitously, and cut off
my mirth, because he would not let me listen to
the cither-playing and singing. Such, Cock, was
the dinner. 


 Cock Not much fun, Mikyllos, particularly as
you were assigned to that silly old man.

Mikyllos But now hear my dream, too. I
thought that Eukrates was dying, being somehow
childless, and he sent for me and made a will by
which I was heir to everything he had, and shortly after died. I came into possession of the property, and drew gold and silver by the bucketful
from a perennial stream. As to other things,
clothing, and furniture, and plate, and servants,
all I had was just what you would expect. I drove
in a white chariot, lolling back, stared at and envied by all spectators. A quantity of servants
ran and rode before me, and more followed. I
wore his clothes and had as many as sixteen massive rings on my fingers, and I was ordering some
brilliant feast to be prepared for the entertainment of my friends. Then, after the manner of


 

dreams, they were already present, and the supper was just being served, and the drinking was
about to begin. I was in this situation, and pledging each of my guests in golden goblets, and the
dessert was just coming in, when you raised your
inopportune cry, put our feast to confusion, overturned the tables and scattered that wealth so
that it was blown to the winds. Does it strike
you that my anger against you was unreasonable?
I should have liked to see that dream for three
nights running.

Cock What a lover you are of gold and wealth, Mikyllos. Do you admire this one thing of all
others, and think it is happiness to have quantities of gold? 


 Mikyllos I am not alone in my opinion, Pythagoras. You yourself, when you were Euphorbos, decked your locks with gold and silver when
you went to fight the Achaians, actually in battle, where it was a better plan to carry iron than
gold; but even there you thought you must
wreathe your hair with gold before you fought.
And in my judgment that is why Homer said
your hair was like the Graces, because
"it was
tightly bound with gold and with silver." For it
is plain that it looked much more goodly and delightful when it was braided with the gold and
vied with it in splendor. Still it does not make
much difference, Goldlocks, whether you, who


 



were only Panthoos's son, honored gold or not.
But the father of all men and gods, the son of
Kronos and Rhea, when he fell in love with that
Argolian girl, knew no lovelier form to assume,
and no better way to break through the guard of
Akrisios-you know, of course, that he turned
into gold, and poured through the roof to be with
his beloved. So why should I go on to tell you
anything more about it, saying how many wants
gold fills, and how it makes its owners handsome
and clever and powerful, adds glory and reputation to them, and sometimes brings them in a
twinkling from obscurity and contempt to prominence and fame.

Now, you know my neighbor
and fellow-craftsman, Simon, who dined with me
not long ago; that time in the holidays when I
made a bean soup with two slices of sausage in it. 


 Cock I know the little snub-nosed creature.
He picked up the earthen cup, the only one we
had, and carried it off under his arm. I saw him,
Mikyllos. 


 Mikyllos Then was he that stole it, and
afterwards called so many gods to witness his
innocence ! But why did you not cry out and
tell of him then, Cock, when you saw us being
robbed? 


 Cock I crowed, which was all I could do then.
But what has Simon done? I thought you had
something to say about him.


 

 Mikyllos He had a cousin named Drimylos,
who was enormously rich. While he was living
he never gave Simon a cent. Why should he,
who never touched his money himself? But he
died the other day, and all his property has come
by law to Simon, and now he of the dirty rags,
he who used to lick his soup-plate, drives at his
ease, wearing purple and scarlet, owning slaves
and carriages and golden goblets and ivory tables,
with the crowd bowing before him, and not so
much as a glance for me any longer. At least,
I saw him passing close by me and said, "How
do you do, Simon ?" But he flew into a rage and
said, "Tell this beggar not to shorten my name.
I am not called Simon, but Simonides." And
what is more important, the women are in love
with him already, but he is coy with them and
fastidious. Some he approves and treats graciously, but others threaten to hang themselves
because of his neglect. You see what good things
gold can do, if it even transforms the ugly and
makes them charming, as that cestus did in the
poem. You know, too, what the poets say:
 O gold, fairest of possessions; 
and,
 For it is gold that sways mortals. 
But what are you laughing at in the midst of my
story, Cock?

Cock To see you, too, Mikyllos, sharing the
vulgar error about rich people through your ignorance. Be assured that they live a much more
wretched life than you do. I tell you as one who
has been both poor and rich over and over again,
and tried every sort of life. It will not be long
before you yourself will have knowledge of each. 


 Mikyllos By Zeus! it is high time for you to
take your turn and tell about your metamorphoses,
and what you know about each life. 


 Cock Listen, but first know this, that I have
seen no living soul happier than you.
 


 Mikyllos Than I? I wish you the same, for
you move me to use bad language to you. But
begin with Euphorbos, and tell me how you were
changed into Pythagoras, and so on in order down
to the cock. For you must have had a variety of
sights and experiences in your manifold lives.

Cock How my soul first took its flight from
Apollo down to earth, and made its way into the
body of a man in expiation of some crime would
be over long to tell; and, moreover, it is not lawful for me to speak or you to hear such matters
as these. Then I became Euphorbos. 


 Mikyllos Tell me this first, have I, too, ever
been changed like you? 


 Cock Certainly. 


 Mikyllos Who was I, then, if you can tell me,
for I long to know.


 
 


 Cock You? You were an Indian ant of the
gold-digging variety. 


 Mikyllos Poor devil, why did I hesitate to provide myself with even a few grains when I came
from that life to this? But tell me, too, what I
am going to be next. Probably you know. If it
should be anything good, I will get up forthwith
and hang myself from the peg you are standing on.

Cock There is no way by which you can learn
that. But when I became Euphorbos-to go
back to what I was saying-I fought at Ilion, fell
by the hand of Menelaos, and shortly after passed
into Pythagoras. In the mean time I hung about
homeless until Mnesarchos wrought my home for
me. 
 Mikyllos With nothing to eat, my good sir, or
to drink? 


 Cock Of course. It is only the body that needs
such things. 


 Mikyllos Well, then, tell me first about affairs
at Ilion. Were things as Homer says they were? 


 Cock How did he know anything about it, seeing he was a Baktrian camel at the time? But I
will tell you this, that nothing was remarkable in
those days. Ajax was not so tall nor Helen herself so beautiful as they are thought to have been.
I saw some one with a white skin and a long
neck, as was natural in a swan's daughter, but
for the rest she was an old woman, almost Hekuba's


 



age.
For Theseus, who was born in the
time of Herakles, first carried her off and held
her in Aphidnai; and Herakles captured Troy
before in the days of our fathers at the latest.
Panthoos used to tell me all these things, saying
that he had seen Herakles when he was a boy. 


 Mikyllos Dear me! Was Achilles, as he is
said to be, best in every way, or is that, too, a
myth? 


 Cock I never encountered him in battle, and
I could not give you so exact an account of the
Achaians' affairs. How could I, seeing that I
was an enemy? However, I killed his comrade,
Patroklos, without much trouble, piercing him
with my spear. 


 Mikyllos And then Menelaos killed you more
easily still.
But that will do on this subject. Now tell me
about Pythagoras.

Cock I was a complete sophist, Mikyllos, for
it is right, I think, to tell the truth. However, I
was not uneducated nor neglectful of the noblest
studies, and I even journeyed to Egypt to receive
instruction from the priests. I made my way into
the temples and mastered the books of Oros and
Isis. And then I sailed back to Italy and so
wrought upon the Greeks there that they reckoned me a god. 


 Mikyllos I have heard of this, and that you


 


were deemed to have risen from the dead, and
that you once showed them that your thigh was
gold. But tell me this, why did it occur to you
to make a law against eating either flesh or
beans? 


 Cock Don't ask such things, Mikyllos. 


 Mikyllos Why not? 


 Cock Because I am ashamed to tell you the
truth about them. 


 Mikyllos Now, there is no reason whatever for
hesitating to tell a man who is your messmate
and friend, for I would no longer call myself your
master. 


 Cock I had no sound or reasonable motive;
but seeing that if my practices were ordinary and
the same as most people's, I should fail to draw
on men to wonder at me, but the more outlandish
they were the more august I seemed to them, this
was the reason why I chose to innovate, pretending that my grounds were too holy for discussion,
so that each might have his conjecture, and all
stand amazed as at the dark sayings of the oracles. There, even you are laughing at me in
your turn. 


 Mikyllos Not so much at you as at the Krotoniates and Metapontines and Tarentines and
the others who followed you speechless and kissed
the footprints you left as you walked.

But when you had laid Pythagoras aside, what


 



character did you clothe yourself with after
him? 


 Cock Aspasia, the courtesan from Miletos. 


 Mikyllos Oh, what a tale! Pythagoras became
even a woman among other people, and there was
a time when you, most noble cock, were Aspasia,
Perikles' mistress, and carded wool and wove the
weft and sold your favors! 


 Cock I am not the only man who has done all
these things. Teiresias, too, before me, and
Kaineus, Elatos' son, were in my case, so that
any joke you make against me will also be made
against them. 


 Mikyllos Tell me, which life did you find.
pleasanter, when you were a man or when Perikles
caressed you? 


 Cock Beware of asking a question that was not
agreeable even to Teiresias. 


 Mikyllos Even if you will not tell me, Euripides
decided the matter adequately, saying that he
would rather stand by his shield thrice than bear
one child. 


 Cock You will be a woman yourself, Mikyllos,
over and over in the great lapse of time. 



 Mikyllos Be hanged to you for thinking every
one a Milesian or a Samian.

But what shape of man or woman did you ap
pear in after Aspasia ? 


 Cock The cynic Krates.


 

 Mikyllos Ye gods, that's a change - from a
courtesan to a philosopher! 


 Cock Then I was a king, then a poor man, and
a little while after a satrap, then a horse, and a
jackdaw, and a frog, and a thousand other things.
It would take too long to enumerate them all.
Finally I have been a cock many times, for I liked
the life. I have served many others, kings and
poor men and rich men, and now finally I live
with you, laughing daily to hear you weep and
wail over your poverty and admire the rich, in
your ignorance of the evils belonging to them.
Certainly, if you knew the cares they have, your
first laugh would be at yourself for thinking a
rich man over-happy. 


 Mikyllos Well then, Pythagoras, or whatever
you would prefer to be called, so that I may not
disturb your recital, calling you first one thing
and then another- 

 Cock It makes no difference whether
you call
me Euphorbus or Pythagoras or Aspasia or
Krates, for I am all these. But you would do
best to call this present form "Cock," not to be
lacking in respect to the bird because it is held a
humble creature, seeing that it embraces so many
souls.

Mikyllos Well then, Cock, since you have tried
pretty much every life and been everything, kindly
tell me now what the private life of the rich is


 



and of the poor, too, to show me whether you are
telling the truth when you declare me happier
than the rich. 


 Cock Come, look at it in this way: To you
war is of no great moment, or the report that the
enemy is invading us. You do not worry lest
they attack your farm, cut down your crops,
trample your shrubberies under foot, or ravage
your grapes. When the trumpet sounds, if, indeed, you hear it at all, the most you do is to look
for a place of safety for yourself, where you may
escape the danger. But the rich, in addition to
their personal anxiety, have the misery of looking
from the walls and seeing all they had on their
estates driven or carried away. And if subsidies
are needed, they alone are called upon, and if an
army must go out they have the posts of most
danger as generals or cavalry officers. But you
have an osier-shield, you are well equipped and
lightly armed, so that you can save yourself, and
you are ready to feast in honor of the victory
when the triumphant general sacrifices to the
gods.

In peace, on the other hand, you are one of
the people, and you enter the assembly and
domineer over the rich. They tremble and
crouch before you, and propitiate you with grants,
slaving to provide you with baths and games and
shows and the other things in abundance. But


 


you, as auditor of the public accounts or examiner, rule them like a savage master, sometimes
without even accounting for your acts. If it
seems good to you, you shower down stones on
them like hail with a free hand, or confiscate their
property. You have no fear of the sycophant
for your person, or of the robber lest he climb
over the coping or burrow through the wall and
steal your gold. And you need not trouble yourself with keeping accounts or dunning people or
wrestling with those confounded stewards. No
such cares tear you asunder. No; when you
have finished a shoe and received your twenty
cents for it, you leave your work towards nightfall, and, if you like, have your bath; then you
buy a salt fish or some sprats or a handful of
onions, and with this you make merry, singing
most of the time, and philosophising with your
good friend, poverty.

This kind of life makes
you healthy and strong and hardens you against
the cold, for you are so whetted on the grindstone
of your hardships that you are a shrewd fighter
against things that other people find irresistible.
Of course, none of those distressing diseases
come your way. If ever a light fever touches
you, you give way to it for a little, but then you
start up and forthwith shake off the trouble. It
flees on the instant in terror when it sees that you
are a cold-water drinker, and have said a long


 



fare-ill to the doctor's visits. But those who have
come to grief through indulgence have every evil
under the sun gout and consumption and pneumonia and dropsy, for these are the offspring of
those sumptuous dinners. Accordingly, some of
them who fly high, like Ikaros, and get near the
sun, not knowing their plumage is fastened with
wax, fall occasionally head-foremost into the sea
with a mighty splash. But those who follow Daedalos, and whose ideas are not too lofty, but so
near the earth that the wax is sometimes wet
with spray, these, for the most part, fly in safety. 


 Mikyllos That is to say, people of good common-sense. 


 Cock But the other sort, Mikyllos, make shameful shipwreck. When Kroisos's feathers are
plucked the Persians laugh to see him mount the
pyre. Dionysios, his kingdom lost, is seen teaching school in Corinth. He descended from such
a throne as his to teach children to spell.

Mikyllos Tell me, Cock, when you were a king
-for you say you were once even on the throne
—what was your experience of that life? I suppose you were perfectly happy, for you had whatever is best of all good things. 


 Cock Do not remind me of that thrice unhappy
time. As far as those external goods go that you
speak of, I seemed indeed perfectly happy, but
I had a thousand troubles within. 


 


 Mikyllos What were they? This is astonishing, and I don't altogether believe it. 


 Cock I ruled over a large and fertile country,
Mikyllos, fit to rank with the best for its population and the beauty of its cities. It was traversed
by navigable rivers, and had a seaboard with
good harbors. I had a large army, with welltrained cavalry, a considerable body-guard, a
navy, untold treasure, quantities of gold plate,
and all the rest of the royal mise en scène in profusion and excess. Whenever I went abroad the
crowd saluted me, believing they beheld a god,
and thronged on each others' heels to get sight
of me; some would even mount the roofs and
count it a great thing to have a clear view of my
chariot, my robes, my outriders, and my escort.
But I, conscious of my sorrows and agonies,
made allowance for their ignorance and pitied my
own case, which I compared with the colossal
statues that Pheidias or Myron or Praxiteles
wrought. Each of these, too, if you look at it
from the outside, is a Poseidon or a Zeus of perfect beauty, made in gold or ivory, grasping the
thunderbolt or the lightning or the trident in his
right hand; but if you stoop and look inside you
will see bars and bolts and nails piercing from
side to side, and timbers and wedges and pitch
and clay and a great many other things just as
unsightly which are hidden there, to say nothing


 



of the crowds of rats and mice that sometimes
colonize them. Well, royalty is much like this.

Mikyllos But you have not told me what the
clay and bolts and bars of royalty are, nor the
nature of that mass of unsightly things. To be
stared at when you drive out, and to rule so many
people, and to be saluted like a god, may justly
be likened to the great statue, for they are both
well-nigh divine. But tell me now, what is inside
the colossus? 


 Cock Where shall I begin? With the fears
and frights and suspicions? The hatred and
plots of those about the king? The scanty sleep,
and that with one eye open, that these leave him?
The troubled dreams, the tangled schemes, the
hopes that never come to pass? Or the press of
business, the audiences, the decisions, the going
out to war, the orders to be given, the treaties to
be made, the accounts to be kept?. This will not
suffer a king to have any pleasure, even in his
dreams, but he alone must keep watch for all
and feel a thousand cares.

 
 For sweet sleep held not Agamemnon, son of 
 Atreus, revolving many things in his mind, 
 
though all the Achaians were snoring. Kroisus
was troubled because his son was deaf, Artaxerxes
because Klearchos hired himself to Cyros, another
ruler because Dion whispered in the ears of some
of the Syracusans, and another because Parmenion


 


 was praised. Ptolemy made Perdikkas
wretched, and Seleukos did the same for Ptolemy. There are other sources of trouble, too:
love won by force, a mistress that bestows her
favors elsewhere, rumors of sedition, two or three
of the body-guard whispering together. Worst
of all, a king must hold his nearest and dearest
in the greatest suspicion, and be ever expecting
an ill turn from them. This one died of poison
by his son's hand; that one actually was killed
by his beloved; a third, perhaps, was snatched
by a like manner of death.

Mikyllos That will do! These are horrible
things you tell me of. To my mind, then, it is a
good deal safer to sit stooping over one's last
than to drink from a golden goblet if the lovingcup is mixed with hemlock or aconite. The only
danger I run is of cutting my fingers so that they
bleed for a moment, if my knife should slip aside
and run out of the straight groove. But they, by
your story, feast on deadly food, surrounded by
a thousand evils. Then, when they fall from
power, they are more like the tragic actors than
anything else, whom you may see often with diadems, and ivory-hilted swords, and waving hair,
and gold-sprinkled cloaks, as long as they are
Kekrops or Sisyphos or Telephos. But if one of
them steps into a hole, as often happens, and
tumbles down in the middle of the stage, see how


 



the spectators laugh at the broken mask and diadem, and the actor's own bleeding head, and his
legs bared so that you can see the wretched rags
under his robe, and the straps that hold on his
shapeless and ill-fitting buskins. You see how I
have learned the art of simile from you already,
my best of cocks! But we have seen what royalty is like; when you became a horse or a dog
or a fish or a frog, how did you enjoy that sort of
life? 


 Cock You raise a great question, and this is
not the time to discuss it. But to put it in a
nutshell, every one of those lives, in my judgment, is freer from care than the human life,
being measured only by the physical desires and
needs. You will never find among the animals a
horse who is a tax-gatherer, or a frog who is a
spy, or a jackdaw who is a sophist, or a mosquito
who is a cook, or a cock who is a libertine, or
any other evil life you can think of.

Mikyllos Probably this is all very true, Cock,
but I will confess my case to you without shame.
I am still unable to rid my mind of the longing I
have had from childhood to be a rich man. In
fact, the dream still stands before my eyes pointing to gold, and, most of all, it chokes me to think
of that confounded Simon revelling in such goodfortune. 


 Cock I will cure you, Mikyllos. It is still



 


night, so get up and come with me. I will take
you to see Simon and into the houses of the other
rich men, to show you how things are with them. 


 Mikyllos How can you? The doors are
locked. You are not going to make a burglar of
me, are you? 


 Cock Heaven forbid; but Hermes, whose sacred bird I am, bestowed on me this special gift:
if my longest tail-feather, the one that curls because it is so soft, be- 

 Mikyllos But you have two like that! 


 Cock The man whom I permit to pluck the
right hand one and keep it will be able to open
any door and see everything, himself unseen, as
long as I am willing. 


 Mikyllos I did not know, Cock, that you are a
sorcerer, too. Now if you will give me this chance
once, you will soon see all Simon's wealth transferred to this house; for if I can make my way in
I will carry it off, and then he will have to come
back to his lasts and nibble for a living. 


 Cock That is not permitted. Hermes commanded me, if the holder of the feather should
do anything of the sort, to give the alarm and
have him caught in the theft. 


 Mykillos That is a likely story! Hermes, a
thief himself, begrudges theft to others! However, let us be off. I will keep my hands off the
gold if I can.



 


 Cock First, Mikyllos, pluck the soft feather.
What are you doing? You have plucked them
both! 


 Mykillos To be on the safe side, Cock. And
you will look better so. Your tail will be more
symmetrical.

Cock All right. Shall we go to see Simon first,
or some other millionaire ? 


 Mikyllos Oh, Simon, by all means, who thinks
himself a greater man by two syllables now he is
rich. Here we are already at his door. What
must I do next? 


 Cock Touch the bolt with the feather. 


 Mykillos That's done. Gracious heaven, the
door has opened as if with a key! 


 Cock Go in first. There, do you see him keeping vigil over his accounts? 


 Mikyllos Yes! by Zeus, with a feeble, ill-fed
lamp. And he is pale, I don't know why, and he
has fallen away to a skeleton. It must be from
anxiety, for I never heard he was ill otherwise. 


 Cock Hear what he says. Then you will know
why he is thus. 


 Simon So that seventy thousand dollars is
pretty safely buried under the bed, and nobody
at all knows about it; but I have an idea that
Sosylos the groom saw me burying the sixteen
thousand under the manger. Anyhow, he is forever about the stable now, though he was not so


 



very careful or fond of his work before. And
probably I am being plundered of a good deal
besides this; for where did Tibios get the money
for those large fish they say he bought yesterday,
and those ear-rings for his wife, worth a dollar at
least? It is my money they are snatching, unlucky wretch that I am! Even my plate is not
safely stored, and there is so much of it! I am
afraid a house-breaker will get it. A great many
people envy me and plot against me, particularly
my neighbor Mikyllos. 


 Mikyllos Yes, by Zeus! I am going off with a
basin under my arm just as you did! 


 Cock Hush, Mikyllos, he will know we are here. 


 Simon The best plan is to sit up all night myself and look after everything. I will get up and
make the round of the house. Who is that? I
see you, you thief— Good heaven, you are only
a pillar-that's all right.
I will dig up my money and count it again, lest
I overlooked any the day before yesterday.
There, I hear some one coming to attack me
again. Every one is besieging me and plotting
against me. Where is my dagger? If I catch
any one-
Come, I must bury the money again.

Cock Such, Mikyllos, is the state of affairs
with Simon. Let us be off to some one else while
there is still a little of the night left.


 


 Mikyllos Poor devil, what a life he leads. May
my enemies get rich like him! I want to give
him one good thump and then go off. 


 Simon Who struck me? I am robbed, wretched man! 


 Mikyllos Bemoan yourself and lie awake, and
stick to your gold till you turn to the color of it!
Let us go, if you please, to see Gniphon, the
money-lender. He lives near by.
This door, too, opened of itself.

Cock See, he is awake with his cares like the
other, calculating his interest with his fingers stiff
already. He must soon leave all these behind
and turn to a book-worm or a carrion-fly. 


 Mikyllos I see a wretched, senseless human
being, whose life now is not much better than a
worm's or a gnat's. He, too, is worn to the bone
with his accounts.

Cock Well, now, Mikyllos, should you like to
fall heir to all this, along with the wealth of Eukrates?

Mikyllos Heaven forbid, Cock. I would rather
starve. Farewell to gold and dinners! I call
five cents a better fortune than to be robbed by
your servants. 


 Cock But for this time we must go home, for
day is already beginning to break.
You shall see the rest another time, Mikyllos.