Best wishes from Lucian to Cronius. 

 
Unlucky Peregrinus, or, as he delighted to style
himself, Proteus, has done exactly what Proteus
in Homer did. After turning into everything for
the sake of notoriety and achieving any number of
transformations, here at last he has turned into fire;
so great, it seems, was the love of notoriety that
eae be him. And now your genial friend has got
imself carbonified after the fashion of Empedocles,
except that the latter at least tried to escape





 

observation when he threw himself into the crater, 
while this gentleman waited for that one of the
Greek festivals which draws the greatest crowds,
heaped up a very large pyre, and leaped into it
before all those witnesses; he even addressed the
Greeks on the subject not many days before his
venture.

I think I can see you laughing heartily at the old
man’s drivelling idiocy—indeed, I hear you give
tongue as you naturally would: “Oh, the stupidity !
Oh, the vainglory! Oh”—everything else that we
are in the habit of saying about it all. Well, you
are doing this at a distance and with far greater
security, but I said it right by the fire and even
earlier in a great crowd of listeners, angering some
of them—as many as admired the old man’s
fool-hardiness; but there were others beside myself
who laughed at him. However, I narrowly missed
getting torn limb from limb for you by the Cynics
just as Actaeon was by his dogs or his cousin Pentheus
by the Maenads.

The complete mise en scéne of the affair was as
follows. You know, of course, what the playwright
was like and what spectacular performances he
presented his whole life long, outdoing Sophocles
and Aeschylus. As for my part in it, as soon as I
came to Elis, in going up? by way of the gymnasium
I overheard a Cynic bawling out the usual street-corner invocations to Virtue in a loud, harsh voice,
and abusing everyone without exception. Then
his harangue wound up with Proteus, and to the best


 

of my ability I shall try to quote for you the very
words he said. You will find the style familiar, of
course, as you have often stood near them while
they were ranting.

“Does anyone dare,” he said, ‘to call Proteus
vainglorious, O Earth, O sun, O rivers, O sea, O
Heracles, god of our fathers!—Proteus, who was
imprisoned in Syria, who renounced five thousand
talents in favour of his native land, who was banished
from the city of Rome, who is more conspicuous
than the sun, who is able to rival Olympian Zeus
himself? Because he has resolved to depart from
life by way of fire, are there people who attribute
this to vainglory? Why, did not Heracles do so?
Did not Asclepius and Dionysus, by grace of the
thunderbolt? Did not Empedocles end by leaping
into the crater?”

When Theagenes —for that was the bawler’s ,
name—said that, I asked a bystander, “What is the
meaning of his talk about fire, and what have Heracles
and Empedocles to do with Proteus?” “Before
long,” he replied, “Proteus is going to burn himself
up at the Olympic festival.” “How,” said I, “and
why?” Then he undertook to tell me, but the
Cynic was bawling, so that it was impossible to hear
anyone else. I listened, therefore, while he flooded




 

us with the rest of his bilge-water and got off a
lot of amazing hyperbole about Proteus, for, not
deigning to compare him with the man of Sinope, 
or his teacher Antisthenes, or even with Socrates
himself, he summoned Zeus to the lists. Then,
however, he decided to keep them about equal, and
thus concluded his speech:

“These are the two
noblest masterpieces that the world has seen—the
Olympian Zeus, and Proteus; of the one, the creator
and artist was Phidias, of the other, Nature. But
now this holy image is about to depart from among
men to gods, borne on the wings of fire, leaving us
bereft.” After completing this discourse with
copious perspiration, he shed tears in a highly
ridiculous way and tore his hair, taking care not to
pull very hard; and at length he was led away,
sobbing as he went, by some of the Cynics, who
strove to comfort him.

After him, another man went up at once, not permitting the throng to disperse, but pouring a libation
on the previous sacrificial offerings while they were
still ablaze. At first he laughed a long time, and
obviously did it from the heart. Then he began
somewhat after this fashion: “Since that accursed
Theagenes terminated his pestilential remarks with
the tears of Heraclitus, I, on the contrary, shall
begin with the laughter of Democritus.” And
again he went on laughing a long time, so that he




 

drew most of us into doing likewise.

Then, changing
countenance, he said, “Pray, what else, gentlemen,
are we to do when we hear utterances so ridiculous,
and see old men all but standing on their heads in
public for the sake of a little despicable notoriety?
That you may know what manner of thing is this
‘holy image’ which is about to be burned up, give
me your ears, for I have observed his character
and kept an eye on his career from the beginning,
and have ascertained various particulars from his
fellow-citizens and people who cannot have helped
knowing him thoroughly.

“This creation and masterpiece of nature, this
Polyclitan canon, as soon as he came of age, was
taken in adultery in Armenia and got a sound
thrashing, but finally jumped down from the roof
and made his escape, with a radish stopping his
vent. Then he corrupted a handsome boy, and by
paying three thousand drachmas to the boy’s parents,
who were poor, bought himself off from being brought
before the governor of the province of Asia.

“All this and the like of it I propose to pass over ;
for he was still unshapen clay, and our ‘holy
image’ had not yet been consummated for us.
What he did to his father, however, is very well
worth hearing; but you all know it—you have
heard how he strangled the aged man, unable to
tolerate his living beyond sixty years. Then,
when the affair had been noised abroad, he condemned himself to exile and roamed about, going
to one country after another.

“It was then that he learned the wondrous lore
of the Christians, by associating with their priests
and scribes in Palestine. And—how else could it
be P—in a trice he made them all look like children ;
for he was prophet, cult-leader, head of the synagogue, and everything, all by himself. He interpreted and explained some of their books and even
composed many, and they revered him as a god, made
use of him as a lawgiver, and set him down as a
protector, next after that other, to be sure, whom 
they still worship, the man who was crucified in
Palestine because he introduced this new cult into
the world.

“Then at length Proteus was apprehended for this
and thrown into prison, which itself gave him no
little reputation as an asset for his future career and
the charlatanism and notoriety-seeking that he was
enamoured of. Well, when he had been imprisoned,
the Christians, regarding the incident as a calamity,
left nothing undone in the effort to rescue him.
Then, as this was impossible, every other form of
attention was shown him, not in any casual way but
with assiduity ; and from the very break of day aged
widows and orphan children could be seen waiting
near the prison, while their officials even slept inside
with him after bribing the guards. Then elaborate
meals were brought in, and sacred books of theirs
were read aloud, and excellent Peregrinus—for he
still went by that name—was called by them ‘ the
new Socrates.’

“Indeed, people came even from the cities in Asia,
sent by the Christians at their common expense,
to succour and defend and encourage the hero. They
show incredible speed whenever any such public
action is taken; for in no time they lavish their all.
So it was then in the case of Peregrinus; much money
came to him from them by reason of his imprisonment, and he procured not a little revenue from it.
 

 
The poor wretches have convinced themselves,
first and foremost, that they are going to be immortal
and live for all time, in consequence of which they
despise death and even willingly give themselves
into custody, most of them. Furthermore, their
first lawgiver persuaded them that they are all
brothers of one another after they have transgressed
once for all by denying the Greek gods and by
worshipping that crucified sophist himself and living
under his laws. Therefore they despise all things
indiscriminately and consider them common property,
receiving such doctrines traditionally without any
definite evidence. So if any charlatan and trickster,
able to profit by occasions, comes among them, he
quickly acquires sudden wealth by imposing upon
simple folk.

“However, Peregrinus was freed by the then
governor of Syria, a man who was fond of philosophy. . Aware of his recklessness and that he



 

would gladly die in order that he might leave behind
him a reputation for it, he freed him, not considering him worthy even of the usual chastisement. 
Upon returning to his home, he found that the matter
of his father’s murder was still at fever heat and that
there were many who were for pressing the charge
against him. Most of his possessions had been
carried off during his absence, and only his farms
remained, amounting to fifteen talents; for the
entire property which the old man left had been
worth perhaps thirty talents, not five thousand as
that utterly ridiculous Theagenes asserted. Even the
entire city of Parium, taking along with it the five
that are its neighbours, would not fetch that much,
including the men, the cattle, and all the rest of
their belongings.

“However, the charge and complaint was still
aglow, and it was probable that before long somebody
would appear against him; above all, the people
themselves were enraged, mourning over a good old
man (as he was called by those who had seen him) so
impiously slain. But observe what a plan our clever
Proteus discovered to cope with all this, and how he
escaped the danger. Coming before the assembly
of the Parians—he wore his hair long by now, dressed
in a dirty mantle, had a wallet slung at his side, the
staff was in his hand, and in general he was very
histrionic in his get-up—manifesting himself to
them in this guise, he said that he relinquished to the



 

state all the property which had been left him by his
father of blessed memory. When the people, poor
folk agape for largesses, heard that, they lifted their
voices forthwith: ‘The one and only philosopher!
The one and only patriot! The one and only rival
of Diogenes and Crates!’ His enemies were
muzzled, and anyone who tried to mention the murder
was at once pelted with stones.

“He left home, then, for the second time, to roam
about, possessing an ample source of funds in the
Christians, through whose ministrations he lived in
unalloyed prosperity. For a time he battened himself thus; but then, after he had transgressed in some
way even against them—he was seen, I think,
eating some of the food that is forbidden them —
they no longer accepted him, and so, being at a loss,
he thought he must sing a palinode and demand his
possessions back from his city. Submitting a petition, he expected to recover them by order of the
Emperor. Then, as the city sent representatives to
oppose the claim, he achieved nothing, but was
directed to abide by what he had once for all determined, under no compulsion from anyone.

“Thereafter he went away a third time, to Egypt,
to visit Agathobulus, where he took that wonderful
course of training in asceticism, shaving one half of
his head, daubing his face with mud, and demonstrating what they call‘ indifference’ by erecting his
notorious indifference of the Cynics towards what they ate.
Peregrinus may have signalised his relapse to Cynicism by
sampling a “dinner of Hecate” at the cross-roads.





 

yard amid a thronging mob of bystanders, besides
giving and taking blows on the back-sides with a
stalk of fennel, and playing the mountebank even
more audaciously in many other ways.

“From there, thus equipped, he set sail for Italy
and immediately after disembarking he fell to abusing
everyone, and in particular the Emperor, knowing
him to be mild and gentle, so that he was safe in
making bold. The Emperor, as one would expect,
cared little for his libels and did not think fit to punish
for mere words a man who only used philosophy as a
cloak, and above all, a man who had made a profession of abusiveness. But in our friend’s case, even
from this his reputation grew, among simple folk anyhow, and he was a cynosure for his recklessness, until
finally the city prefect, a wise man, packed him off for
immoderate indulgence in the thing, saying that the
city had no need of any such philosopher. However,
this too made for his renown, and he was on everybody’s lips as the philosopher who had been banished
for his frankness and excessive freedom, so that in this
respect he approached Musonius, Dio, Epictetus, and
anyone else who has been in a similar predicament.

“Coming at last to Greece under these circumstances, at one moment he abused the Eleans, at
another he counselled the Greeks to take up arms
against the Romans, and at another he libelled a man
outstanding in literary attainments and position
because he had been a benefactor to Greece in many




 

ways, and particularly because he had brought water
to Olympia and prevented the visitors to the festival
from dying of thirst, maintaining that he was making
the Greeks effeminate, for the spectators of the
Olympic games ought to endure their thirst—yes,
by Heaven, and even to lose their lives, no doubt,
many of them, through the frequent distempers
which formerly ran riot in the vast crowd on account
of the dryness of the place! And he said this while
he drank that same water!
When they almost killed him with stones, mobbing
him with one accord, he managed to escape death at
the moment by fleeing to Zeus for sanctuary (stout
fellow !),

and afterwards, at the next Olympiad, he
gave the Greeks a speech which he had composed
during the four years that had intervened, praising
the man who had brought in the water and defending
himself for running away at that time.
“At last he was disregarded by all and no longer
so admired; for all his stuff was stale and he could
not turn out any further novelty with which to
surprise those who came in his way and make them
marvel and stare at him—a thing for which he had a
fierce craving from the first. So he devised this
ultimate venture of the pyre, and spread a report
among the Greeks immediately after the last
Olympic games that he would burn himself up at the
next festival.

And now, they say, he is playing the
mountebank over that very thing, digging a pit,


 

collecting logs, and promising really awesome fortitude. 
 

 
“What he should have done, I think, was first and
foremost to await death and not to cut and run from
life ; but if he had determined to be off at all costs, not
to use fire or any of these devices out of tragedy, but
to choose for his departure some other form of death
out of the myriads that there are. If, however, he is
partial to fire as something connected with Heracles,.
why in the world did he not quietly select a wellwooded mountain and cremate himself upon it in
solitude, taking along only one person such as
Theagenes here for his Philoctetes? On the contrary, it is in Olympia, at the height of the festival,
all but in the theatre, that he plans to roast himself—
not undeservedly, by Heracles, if it is right for
parricides and for atheists to suffer for their hardinesses. And from that point of view he seems to be
getting about it very late in the day; he ought long
ago to have been flung into the bull of Phalaris to
pay the fitting penalty instead of opening his mouth
to the flames once for all and expiring in a trice. For






 

people tell me that no other form of death is quicker
than that by fire; you have only to open your mouth,
and die forthwith.

“The spectacle is being planned, I suppose, as
Something awe-inspiring—a fellow getting burnt up
in a holy place where it is impious even to bury the
others who die. But you have heard, no doubt, that
long ago a man who wished to become famous burned
the temple of Ephesian Artemis, not being able to
attain that end in any other way. He himself has
something similar in mind, so great is the craving for
fame that has penetrated him to the core.

“He alleges, however, that he is doing it for the
sake of his fellow men, that he may teach them to
despise death and endure what is fearsome. For my
part, I should like to ask, not him but you, whether
you would wish malefactors to become his disciples
in this fortitude of his, and to despise death and
burning and similar terrors. No, you would not, I
am very sure. How, then, is Proteus to draw distinctions in this matter, and to benefit the good
without making the bad more adventurous and
daring?

“Nevertheless, suppose it possible that only those
will present themselves at this affair who will see it
to their advantage. Once more I shall question you:
would you desire your children to become imitators of
such a man? You will not say so. But why did I
ask that question, when even of his disciples them-



 

selves not one would imitate him? In fact, the thing
for which one might blame Theagenes most of all is
that although he copies the man in everything else,
he does not follow his teacher and take the road
with him, now that he is off, as he says, to join
Heracles; why, he has the opportunity to attain
absolute felicity instanter by plunging headlong into
the fire with him! 

 
“Emulation is not a matter of wallet, staff, and
mantle; all this is safe and easy and within anyone’s
power. One should emulate the consummation and
culmination, build a pyre of fig-wood logs as green as
can be, and stifle one’s selfin the smoke of them. Fire
itself belongs not only to Heracles and Asclepius,
but to doers of sacrilege and murder, who can be
seen enduring it by judicial sentence. Therefore it
is better to employ smoke, which would be peculiar
and belong only to you and your like.

“Besides, if Heracles really did venture any such
act, he did it because he was ailing, because the blood
of the Centaur, as the tragedies tell us, was preying
upon him; but for what reason does this man throw
himself bodily into the fire? Oh, yes! to demonstrate his fortitude, like the Brahmans, for Theagenes
thought fit to compare him with them, just as if
there could not be fools and notoriety-seekers even
among the Indians. Well, then, let him at least
imitate them. They do not leap into the fire (so
Onesicritus says, Alexander’s navigator, who saw
Calanus burning), but when they have built their
pyre, they stand close beside it motionless and en-


 

dure being toasted; then, mounting upon it, they
cremate themselves decorously, without the slightest
alteration of the position in which they are lying. 

 
“In this man’s case, what great thing will it be if
he tumbles in and dies in the sudden grip of the fire?
It is not beyond expectation that he will jump out
half consumed, unless, as they say, he is going to see
to it that the pyre is deep down in a pit.

There are
people who say that he has even changed his mind,
and is telling certain dreams, to the effect that
Zeus does not permit pollution of a holy place. But
let him be assured on that score; I would take my
oath to it that no one of the gods would be angry if
Peregrinus should die a rogue’s death. Moreover, it
is not easy for him to withdraw now; for his Cynic
associates are urging him on and pushing him into
the fire and inflaming his resolution; they will not
let him shirk it. If he should pull a couple of them
into the fire along with him when he jumps in, that
would be the only nice thing about his performance.

“Thave heard that he no longer deigns to be called
Proteus but has changed his name to Phoenix,
because the phoenix, the Indian bird, is said to mount
a pyre when it is very far advanced in age. Indeed,
he even manufactures myths and repeats certain
oracles, ancient, of course, to the purport that he
is to become a guardian spirit of the night; it is
plain, too, that he already covets altars and expects
to be imaged in gold.

“By Zeus, it would be nothing unnatural if, among
all the dolts that there are, some should be found to
assert that they were relieved of quartan fevers by
him, and that in the dark they had encountered the
guardian spirit of the night! Then too these accursed
disciples of his will make an oracular shrine, I suppose,
with a holy of holies, at the site of the pyre, because
the famous Proteus, son of Zeus, the progenitor of
his name, was given to soothsaying. I pledge m
word, too, that priests of his will be appointed, wit
whips or branding-irons or some such flummy-diddle,
or even that a nocturnal mystery will be got up in his
honour, including a torch festival at the site of the
pye.

"Theagenes, as I have been told by one of my
friends, recently said that the Sibyl had made a
prediction about all this; in fact, he quoted the verses from memory :

 
 But when the time shall come that Proteus, noblest of Cynics, 
 Kindleth fire in the precinct of Zeus, our Lord of the Thunder, 
 Leapeth into the flame, and cometh to lofty Olympus, 
 Then do I bid all alike who eat the fruit of the ploughland 
 Honour to pay unto him that walketh abroad in the night-time, 
 Greatest of spirits, thronéd with Heracles and Hephaestus.

“That is what Theagenes alleges he heard from
the Sibyl. But I will quote him one of the oracles of



 

Bacis dealing with these matters. Bacis expresses
himself as follows, with a very excellent moral :

 
 
 Nay, when the time shall come that a Cynic with names that are many 
 Leaps into roaring flame, soul-stirred by a passion for glory, 
 Then it is meet that the others, the jackals that follow his footsteps, 
 Mimic the latter end of the wolf that has taken departure. 
 But if a dastard among them shall shun the might of Hephaestus, 
 Let him be pelted with stones forthwith by all the Achaeans, 
 Learning, the frigid fool, to abjure all fiery speeches, 
 He that has laden his wallet with gold by the taking of usance ; 
 Thrice five talents he owns in the lovely city of Patras. 
 
 Iliad, XIV, 1. 
 
What do you think, gentlemen? That Bacis is a worse soothsayer than the Sibyl? It is high time,
then, for these wondrous followers of Proteus to
look about for a place in which to aerify themselves—for that is the name they give to cremation.”

When he had said these words, all the bystanders
shouted: “Let them be burned right now; they
deserve the flames!” And the man got down again
laughing; but “Nestor failed not to mark the
din: 3 I mean Theagenes. When he heard the
shouting he came at once, took the platform, and fell to




 

ranting and telling countless malicious tales about the
man who had just got down—I do not know what
that excellent gentleman’s name was. For my part,
I left him splitting his lungs and went off to see the
athletes, as the Hellanodicae were said to be already
in the Plethrium.

Well, there you have what happened at Elis; and
when we reached Olympia, the rear chamber was
full of people criticising Proteus of praising his
purpose, so that most of them even came to blows.
Finally, Proteus himself appeared, escorted by a
countless multitude, after the contest of the heralds,
and had somewhat to say about himself, telling of the
life that he had led and the risks that he had run,
and of all the troubles that he had endured for
philosophy’s sake. His speech was protracted, though
I heard but little on account of the number of
bystanders. Afterwards, fearing to be crushed in
such a throng, because I saw this happening to
many, I went away, bidding a long farewell to the
sophist enamoured of death who was pronouncing his
own funeral oration before his demise.

This much, however, I overheard; he said that he
wanted to put a tip of gold on a golden bow; for
one who had lived as Heracles should die like Heracles
and be commingled with the ether. “And I wish,”
said he, “to benefit mankind by showing them the





 

way in which one should despise death; wherefore
all men ought to play Philoctetes to me.” The
more witless among the people began to shed tears
and call out: “Preserve your life for the Greeks!”
but the more virile part bawled “Carry out your
purpose!” by which the old man was immoderately
upset, because he hoped that all would cling to him
and not give him over to the fire, but retain him in
life—against his will, naturally! That “Carry out
your purpose” assailing him quite unexpectedly
caused him to turn still paler, although his colour was
already deathly, and even to tremble slightly, so
that he brought his speech to an end.

You can imagine, I expect, how I laughed; for it
was not fitting to pity a man so desperately in love
with glory beyond all others who are driven by the
same Fury. Anyhow, he was being escorted by
crowds and getting his fill of glory as he gazed at the
number of his admirers, not knowing, poor wretch,
that men on their way to the cross or in the grip of the
executioner have many more at their heels.

Soon the Olympic games were ended, the most
splendid Olympics that I have seen, though it was
then the fourth time that I had been a spectator.
As it was not easy to secure a carriage, since many were
leaving at the same time, I lingered on against my
will, and Peregrinus kept making postponements, but
at last had announced a night on which he would
stage his cremation; so, as one of my friends had
invited me to go along, I arose at midnight and took
the road to Harpina, where the pyre was. This is
quite twenty furlongs from Olympia as one goes past


 

the hippodrome towards the east. As soon as we
arrived, we found a pyre built in a pit about six feet
deep. It was composed mostly of torchwood, and
the interstices filled with brush, that it might take
fire quickly.

When the moon was rising—for she
too had to witness this glorious deed—he came
forward, dressed in his usual fashion, and with him
the leaders of the Cynics; in particular, the gentleman from Patras, with a torch—no bad understudy.
Proteus too was bearing a torch. Men, approaching
from this side and that, kindled the fire into a very
great flame, since it came from torchwood and brush.
Peregrinus—and give me your close attention now !—
laying aside the wallet, the cloak, and that notable
Heracles-club, stood there in a shirt that was downright
filthy. Then he requested incense to throw on the
fire; when someone had proffered it, he threw it on,
and gazing towards the south—even the south, too,
had to do with the show —he said: “Spirits of my
mother and my father, receive me with favour.”

With that he leaped into the fire; he was not visible,
however, but was encompassed by the flames, which
had risen to a great height.
Once more I see you laughing, Cronius, my



 

urbane friend, at the dénouement of the play. For
my own part, when he called upon the guardian
spirits of his mother, I did not criticise him very
strongly, but when he invoked those of his father as
well, I recalled the tales that had been told about his
murder, and I could not control my laughter. The
Cynics stood about the pyre, not weeping, to be sure,
but silently evincing a certain. amount of grief as
they gazed into the fire, until my gorge rose at them,
and I said: “Let us go away, you simpletons. It is
not an agreeable spectacle to look at an old man who
has been roasted, getting our nostrils filled with a
villainous reek. Or are you waiting for a painter to
come and picture you as the companions of Socrates
in prison are portrayed beside him?” They were
indignant and reviled me, and several even took to
their sticks. Then, when I threatened to gather up
a few of them and throw them into the fire, so that
they might follow their master, they checked themselves and kept the peace.

As I returned, I was thinking busily, my friend,
reflecting what a strange thing love of glory is;
how this passion alone is unescapable even by those
who are considered wholly admirable, let alone that
man who in other respects had led a life that was
insane and reckless, and not undeserving of the fire.

Then I encountered many people coming out to see
the show themselves, for they expected to find him
still alive. You see, on the day before it had been
given out that he would greet the rising sun, as, in fact,
they say the Brahmans do, before mounting the pyre.

 

Well, I turned back most of them by saying the
deed had been done already, those to whom it was
not in itself highly desirable to see the actual spot,
anyhow, and gather up some relic of the fire.
In that business, I assure you, my friend, I had no
end of trouble, telling the story to all while they
asked questions and sought exact information.
Whenever I noticed a man of taste, I would tell him
the facts without embellishment, as I have to you;
but for the benefit of the dullards, agog to listen,
I would thicken the plot a bit on my own account,
saying that when the pyre was kindled and Proteus
flung himself bodily in, a great earthquake first took
place, accompanied by a bellowing of the ground, and
then a vulture, flying up out of the midst of the flames,
went off to Heaven, saying, in human speech, with
a loud voice:

 I am through with the earth; to Olympus I fare. 

They were wonder-struck and blessed themselves
with a shudder, and asked me whether the vulture
sped eastwards or westwards; I made them whatever
reply occurred to me.

On my return to the festival, I came upon a greyhaired man whose face, I assure you, inspired confidence in addition to his beard and his general air
of consequence, telling all about Proteus, and how,
since his cremation, he had beheld him in white
raiment a little while ago, and had just now left him
walking about cheerfully in the Portico of the Seven
Voices, wearing a garland of wild olive. Then on




 

top of it all he put the vulture, swearing that he
himself had seen it flying up out of the pyre, when I
myself had just previously let it fly to ridicule fools
and dullards.

Imagine what is likely to happen in his honour
hereafter, how many bees will not settle on the
place, what cicadas will not sing upon it, what crows
will not fly to it, as they did to the tomb of Hesiod, 
and so forth! As to statues, I know that many will
be set up right soon by the Eleans themselves and
also by the other Greeks, to whom he said he had
sent letters. The. story is that he despatched
missives to almost all the famous cities—testamentary
dispositions, so to speak, and exhortations and
prescriptions—and he appointed a number of
ambassadors for this purpose from among his comrades, styling them “messengers from the dead”
and “underworld couriers.”

So ended that poor wretch Proteus, a man who (to
put it briefly) never fixed his gaze on the verities,
but always did and said everything with a view to
glory and the praise of the multitude, even to the



 

extent of leaping into fire, when he was sure not to
enjoy the praise because he could not hear it.

I shall add one thing more to my story before I
stop, in order that you may be able to have a good
laugh. For of course you have long known that other
tale of mine, as you heard it from me at once, when
on my return from Syria I recounted how I sailed from
the Troad in his company, and about his self-indulgence on the voyage, and the handsome boy
whom he had persuaded to turn Cynic that he too
might have an Alcibiades, and how, when we were
disturbed during the night in mid-Aegean by a
tempest that descended and raised an enormous
sea, this wondrous person who was thought to be
superior to death fell to walling along with the
women!

Well, a short time before his end, about nine
days, it may be, having eaten more than enough, I
suppose, he was sick during the night and was taken
with a very violent fever. This was told me by
Alexander the physician, who had been called in to
see him. He said that he found him rolling on the
ground, unable to stand the burning, pleading very
passionately for a drink of cold water, but that he
would not give it to him. Moreover, he told him,
he said, that Death, if he absolutely wanted him, had
come to his door spontaneously, so that it would be
well to go along, without asking any favour from the
fire; and Proteus replied: “But that way would not
be so notable, being common to all men.”
aside Levi's interpretation of dyad as meaning lutta d’amore,
but his own defence of it as meaning “‘discrimen” does not
properly reckon with the context. -The archetype had a
peculiar pointed w, frequently confused with a: and , and
these with it.

That is Alexander’s story. And I myself not many
days previously saw him smeared with ointment in
order that the sharp salve might relieve his vision by
making him shed tears. Do you get the idea?
Aeacus is reluctant to receive people with weak eyes!
It is as if a man about to go up to the cross should
nurse the bruise on his finger. What do you think
Democritus would have done, had he seen this?
Would not he have laughed at the man as roundly
as he deserved? And yet, where could he have got
that much laughter? Well, my friend, you may have
your laugh also, particularly when you hear the rest
of them admiring him.