In view of what the dolts do at their sacrifices and
their feasts and processions in honour of the gods,
what they pray for and vow, and what opinions they
hold about the gods, I doubt if anyone is so gloomy
and woe-begone that he will not laugh to see the
idiocy of their actions. Indeed, long before he
laughs, I think, he will ask himself whether he
should call them devout or, on the _ contrary,
irreligious and pestilent, inasmuch as they have
taken it for granted that the gods are so low and
mean as to stand in need of men and to enjoy being
flattered and to get angry when they are slighted. 

 
Anyhow, the Aetolian incidents—the hardships of
the Calydonians, all the violent deaths, and the dissolution of Meleager—were all due, they say, to
Artemis, who held a grudge because she had not
been included in Oeneus’ invitation to his sacrifice ;
so deeply was she impressed by the superiority of
his victims! Methinks I can see her in Heaven
then, left all by herself when the other gods and
goddesses had gone to the house of Oeneus, fussing
and scolding about being left out of such a feast!

The Ethiopians, on the other hand, may well be
called happy and thrice-blessed, if Zeus is really
paying them back for the kindness that they showed
him in dining him for twelve days running, and
that too when he brought along the other gods! 

 
So nothing, it seems, that they do is done without
compensation. They sell men their blessings, and one
can buy from them health, it may be, for a calf,
wealth for four oxen, a royal throne for a hundred,
a safe return from Troy to Pylos for nine bulls, and
a fair voyage from Aulis to Troy for a_king’s
daughter! Hecuba, you know, purchased temporary
immunity for Troy from Athena for twelve oxen and
a frock. One may imagine, too, that they have many
things on sale for the price of a cock or a wreath or
nothing more than incense.

Chryses knew this, I suppose, being a priest and an —
old man and wise in the ways of the gods ; so when
he came away from Agamemnon unsuccessful, it was
just as if he had loaned his good works to Apollo;
he took him to task, demanded his due, and all
but insulted him, saying: “My good Apollo, I
have often dressed your temple with wreaths when
it lacked them before, and have burned in your
honour all those thighs of bulls and goats upon your .altars, but you neglect me when I[ am in such straits
and take no account of your benefactor.” 
Consequently, he so discomfited Apollo by his talk that he


 

caught up his bow and arrows, sat. himself down
above the ships, and shot down the Achaeans with the
plague, even to their mules and dogs.

Having once alluded to Apollo, I wish to mention
something else that gifted men say about him, not
his misfortunes in love, such as the slaying of
Hyacinthus and the superciliousness of Daphne, but
that when he was found guilty of killing the Cyclopes
and was banished from Heaven on account of it, he
was sent to earth to try the lot of a mortal. On this
occasion he actually became a serf in Thessaly under
Admetus and in Phrygia under Laomedon, where, to
be sure, he was not alone, but had Poseidon with
him ; and both of them were so poor that they had
to make bricks and work upon the wall; what is
more, they did not even get full pay from the
Phrygian, who owed them, it is said, a balance of
more than thirty Trojan drachmas !

Is it not true that the poets gravely tell these
tales about the gods, and others, too, far more
hallowed than these, about Hephaestus, Prometheus,
Cronus, Rhea and almost the whole family of Zeus?
Yet, in beginning their poems, they invite the
Muses to join their song! Inspired, no doubt, by
the Muses, they sing that as soon as Cronus had
castrated his father Heaven, he became king there
and devoured his own children, like the Argive
Thyestes in later time; that Zeus, stolen away by
Rhea, who put the stone in his place, and abandoned
in Crete, was nursed by a nanny-goat (just as


 

Telephus was nursed by a doe and the Persian, Cyrus
the Elder, by a bitch) and then drove his father out,
threw him into prison, and held the sovereignty
himself; that, in addition to many other wives, he at
last married his sister, following the laws of the
Persians and the Assyrians ; that, being passionate
and prone to the pleasures of love, he soon filled
Heaven with children, some of whom he got by his
equals in station and some illegitimately of mortal,
earthly stock, now turning into gold, this gallant
squire, now into a bull or a swan or an eagle, and in
short, showing himself more changeable than even
Proteus; and that Athena was the only one to be
born of his head, conceived at the very root of his
brain, for as to Dionysus, they say, Zeus took, him
prematurely from his mother while she was still
ablaze, implanted him hastily in his own thigh, and
cut him out when labour came on.

Their rhapsodies about Hera are of similar tenor,
that without intercourse with her husband she
became the mother of a wind-child, Hephaestus, who,
however, is not in great luck, but works at the blacksmith’s trade over a fire, living in smoke most of the
time and covered with cinders, as is natural with a
forge-tender; moreover, he is. not even straightlimbed, as he was lamed py his fall when Zeus threw
him out of Heaven. In fact, if the Lemnians had
not obligingly caught him while he was still in the
air, we should have had our Hephaestus killed just
like Astyanax when he fell from the battlements. 


 

But Hephaestus came off quite well beside Prometheus. Who does not know what happened to him
because he was too philanthropic? Taking him to
Scythia, Zeus pegged him out on the Caucasus and
posted an eagle at his side to peck at his liver every
day.

Prometheus, then, received a sentence and served
it out, but what about Rhea ? One must surely speak
of this also. Does not she misconduct herself and
behave dreadfully? Although she is an old woman,
past her best years, the mother of so many gods,
nevertheless she still has a love affair with a boy and
is jealous, and she takes Attis about with her behind
her lions, in spite of the fact that he cannot be of
any use to her now. So how can one find fault with
Aphrodite for being unfaithful to her husband, or
with Selene for going down to visit Endymion time
and again in the middle of her journey?

Come, dismissing this topic, let us go up to Heaven
itself, soaring up poet-fashion by the same route as
Homer and Hesiod, and let us see how they have
arranged things on high. That it is bronze on the
outside we learned from Homer, who anticipated us
in saying so. But when one climbs over the edge,
puts up one’s head a little way into the world above,
and really gets up on the “back,” the light is
brighter, the sun is clearer, the stars are shinier,
it is day everywhere, and the ground is of gold.
As you go in, the Hours live in the first house, for
they are the warders of the gate; then come Iris
and Hermes, who are attendants and messengers of
Zeus ; next, there is the smithy of Hephaestus, filled
with works of art of every kind, and after that,


 

the houses of the gods and the palace of Zeus, all
very handsomely built by Hephaestus.

“The gods,
assembled in the house of Zeus” —it is in order,
I take it, to elevate one’s diction when one is on
high—look off at the earth and gaze about in every
direction, leaning down to see if they can see fire
being lighted anywhere, or steam drifting up to
them “about the smoke entwined.” If anybody
sacrifices, they all have a feast, opening their mouths
for the smoke and drinking the blood that is spilt
at the altars, just like flies; but if they dine at
home, their meal is nectar and ambrosia. In days of
old, men used to dine and drink with them—Ixion
and Tantalus—but as they behaved shockingly and
talked too much, they are still undergoing punishment to this day, and there is now no admission
for human beings to Heaven, which is strictly
private.

That is the way the gods live, and as a result, the
practices of men in the matter of divine worship are
harmonious and consistent with all that. First they
fenced off groves, dedicated mountains, consecrated
birds and assigned plants to each god. Then they
divided them up, and now worship them by nations
and claim them as fellow-countrymen ; the Delphians
claim Apollo, and so do. the Delians, the Athenians
Athena (in fact, she proves her kinship by her name),
the Argives Hera, the Mygdonians Rhea, the
Paphians Aphrodite. As for the Cretans, they not
only say that Zeus was born and brought up among
them, but even point out his tomb. We were mistaken all this while, then, in thinking that thunder



 

and rain and everything else comes from Zeus ; if we
had but known it, he has been dead and buried in
Crete this long time!

Then too they erect temples, in order that the
gods may not be houseless and hearthless, of course ;
and they fashion images in their likeness, sending for
a Praxiteles or a Polycleitus or a Phidias, who have
caught sight of them somewhere and represent Zeus
as a bearded man, Apollo as a perennial boy, Hermes
with his first moustache, Poseidon with sea-blue hair
and Athena with green eyes! In spite of all, those
who enter the temple think that what they behold is
not now ivory from India nor gold mined in Thrace,
but the very son of Cronus and Rhea, transported to
earth by Phidias and bidden to be overlord of deserted Pisa, thinking himself lucky if he gets a
sacrifice once in four long years as an incident to
the Olympic games.

When they have established altars and formulae
and lustral rites, they present their sacrifices, the
farmer an ox from the plough, the shepherd a lamb,
the goatherd a goat, someone else incense or a cake ;
the poor man, however, propitiates the god by Just
kissing his own hand. But those who offer victims
(to come back to them) deck the animal with garlands, after finding out far in advance whether it is
perfect or not, in order that they may not kill something that is ef no use to them; then they bring it to
the altar and slaughter it under the god’s eyes, while
it bellows plaintively—making, we must suppose,
auspicious sounds, and fluting low music to accompany the sacrifice! Who would not suppose that


 

the gods like to see all this?

And although the
notice says that no one is to be allowed within the
holy-water who has not clean hands, the priest
himself stands there all bloody, just like the Cyclops
of old, cutting up the victim, removing the entrails,
plucking out the heart, pouring the blood about the
altar, and doing everything possible in the way of
piety. To crown it all, he lights a fire and puts upon
it the goat, skin and all, and the sheep, wool and all ;
and the smoke, divine and holy, mounts upward and
gradually dissipates into Heaven itself. 

 
The Scythians, indeed, reject all the sacrificial
animals and think them too mean; they actually
offer men to Artemis and by so doing gratify the
goddess !

These practices are all very well, no doubt, and
also those of the Assyrians and those of the Phrygians
and Lydians; but if you go to Egypt, then, ah! then
you will see much that is venerable and truly in
keeping with Heaven—Zeus with the head of a ram,
good Hermes with the head of a dog, Pan completely metamorphosed into a goat, some other god
into an ibis, another into a crocodile, another into a
monkey !

 
 
 Wouldst thou enquire the cause of these doings in
order to know it, 
 
 Iliad6, 150. 
 

you will hear plenty of men of letters and scribes
and shaven prophets say—but first of all, as the
saying goes,


 
 Uninitiate, shut up your doors! 
 
—that



 

on the eve of the war, the revolt of the giants, the
gods were panic-stricken and came to Egypt, thinking
that surely there they could hide from their enemies ;
and then one of them in his terror entered into a
goat, another into. a ram, and others into other
beasts or birds; so of course the gods still keep the
forms they took then. All this, naturally, is on
record in the temples, having been committed to
writing more than ten thousand years ago!

Sacrifices are the same there as with us, except
that they mourn over the victim, standing about it
and beating their breasts after it has been slain. In
some cases they even bury it after simply cutting its
throat. 

 
And if Apis, the greatest of their gods, dies, who
is there who thinks so much of his hair that he does
not shave it off and baldly show his mourning on
his head, even if he has the purple tress of Nisus? 
But Apis is a god out of the herd, chosen to succeed
the former Apis on the ground that he is far more
handsome and majestic than the run of cattle ! 

 
Actions and beliefs like these on the part of the
public seem to me to require, not someone to censure them, but a Heracleitus or a Democritus, the
one to laugh at their ignorance, the other to bewail
their folly.