CYNISCUS 
But, Zeus, I for my part won’t annoy you that
way by asking for wealth or gold or dominion,
which are, it seems, very desirable to most people,
but not very easy for you to give; at any rate I
notice that you generally turn a deaf ear to their
prayers. I should like to have you grant me only
a single wish, and a very simple one.
 
 ZEUS 
What is it, Cyniscus? You shall not be disappointed, especially if your request is reasonable, as
you say it is.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Answer me a question ; it isn’t hard.
 
 ZEUS 
Your prayer is indeed trivial and easy to fulfil;
so ask what you will.
 
 CYNISCUS 
It is this, Zeus: you certainly have read the
poems of Homer and Hesiod: tell me, then, is
what they have sung about Destiny and the Fates
true, that whatever they spin for each of us at
his birth is inevitable ? 

 

 ZEUS 
It is really quite true. There is nothing which
the Fates do not dispose; on the contrary, everything that comes to pass is controlled by their
spindle and has its outcome spun for it in each
instance from the very beginning, and it cannot
come to pass differently.

CYNISCUS 
Then when this same Homer in another part of
his poem says :

 Take care lest ere your fated hour you go to
house in Hell 
 Iliad20, 336 

and that sort of thing, of course we are to assume
that he is talking nonsense ?
 
 ZEUS 
Certainly, for nothing can come to pass outside
the control of the Fates, nor beyond the thread
they spin. As for the poets, all that they sing
under the inspiration of the Muses is true, but
when the goddesses desert them and they compose
by - themselves, then they make mistakes and contradict what they said before. And it is excusable
that being mere men they do not recognize the
truth when that influence is gone which formerly
abode with them and rhapsodized through them.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Well, we'll assume this to be so. But answer
me another question. There are only three of
the Fates, are there not—Clotho, Lachesis, I believe,
and Atropos?
 
 ZEUS 
Quite so.

CYNISCUS 
Well then, how about Destiny and Fortune?
They are also very much talked of. Who are they,
and what power has each of them? Equal power
with the Fates, or even somewhat more than they?
I hear everyone saying that there is nothing more
powerful than Fortune and Destiny.
 
 ZEUS 
It is not permitted you to know everything, Cyniscus. But why did you ask me that question about
the Fates?

CYNISCUS 
Just tell me something else first, Zeus. Are you
ods under their rule too, and must you needs be
ttached to their thread ?
 
 ZEUS 
We must, Cyniscus. But what made you smile?
 
 CYNISCUS 
I happened to think of those lines of Homer in
hich he described you making your speech in the
sembly of the gods, at the time when you threatied them that you would hang the universe upon a
rd of gold. You said, you know, that you would
t the cord down from Heaven, and that the other
ds, if they liked, might hang on it and try to
Il you down, but would not succeed, while you,
lenever you chose, could easily draw them all up,
nd the earth and the sea along with them.” At
at time it seemed to me that your power was wontful, and I shuddered as I heard the lines; but I
now that in reality you yourself with your cord
and your threats hang by a slender thread, as you

 

admit. In fact, I think that Clotho would have a
better right to boast, inasmuch as she holds you,
even you, dangling from her spindle as fishermen
hold fish dangling from a rod.

ZEUS 
I don’t know what you are driving at with these
questions.
 
 CYNISCUS 
This, Zeus—and I beg you by the Fates and by
Destiny not to hear me with exasperation or anger
when I speak the truth boldly. If all this is so, and
the Fates rule everything, and nobody can ever
change anything that they have once decreed, why
do we men sacrifice to you gods and make you great
offerings of cattle, praying to receive blessings from
you? I really don’t see what benefit we can derive
from this precaution, if it is impossible for us through
our prayers either to get what is bad averted or to
secure any blessing whatever by the gift of the gods.

ZEUS 
I know where you get these clever questions—
from the cursed sophists, who say that we do not
even exert any providence on behalf of men. At
any rate they ask questions like yours out of
impiety, and dissuade the rest from sacrificing and
praying on the ground that it is silly ; for we, they
ay, not only pay no heed to what goes on among
you, but have no power at all over affairs on
‘arth. But they shall be sorry for talking in that
vay,
 
 CYNISCUS 
I swear by the spindle of Clotho, Zeus, they did
lot put me up to ask you this, but our talk itself as

 

it went on led somehow or other to the conclusion
that sacrifices are superfluous. But if you have no
objection I will question you briefly once more. Do
not hesitate to answer, and take care that your
answer is not so weak.
 
 ZEUS 
Ask, if you have time for such nonsense.

CYNISCUS 
You say that all things come about through the
Fates?
 
 ZEUS 
Yes, I do.
 
 CYNISCUS 
And is it possible for you to change them, to unspin them ?
 
 ZEUS 
Not by any means.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Then do you want me to draw the conclusion or is
it patent even without my putting it into words ?
 
 ZEUS 
It is patent, of course ; but those who sacrifice do ©
not do so for gain, driving a sort of bargain, forsooth,
and as it were buying blessings from us ; they do so
simply to honour what is superior to themselves.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Even that is enough, if you yourself admit that
sacrifices are not offered for any useful purpose, but
by reason of the generosity of men, who honour
what is superior. And yet, if one of your sophists
were here, he would ask you wherein you allege the
gods to be superior, when really they are fellow-

 

slaves with men, and subject to the same mistresses,
the Fates. For their immortality will not suffice to
make them seem better, since that feature certainly
is far worse, because men are set free by death at
least, if by nothing else, while with you gods the
thing goes on to infinity and your slavery is eternal,
being controlled by a long thread.

ZEUS 
But, Cyniscus, this eternity and infinity is blissful
for us, and we live in complete happiness.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Not all of you, Zeus; circumstances are different
with you as with us, and there is great confusion in
them. You yourself are happy, for you are king and
can draw up the earth and the sea by letting down a
well-rope, so to speak, but Hephaestus is a cripple
who works for his living, a blacksmith by trade, and
Prometheus was actually crucified once upon a time. 
And why should I mention your father (Cronus), who
is still shackled in Tartarus? They say too that you
gods fall in love and get wounded and sometimes
become slaves in the households of men, as did your
brother (Poseidon) in the house of Laomedon and
Apollo in the house of Admetus. This does not
seem to me altogether blissful; on the contrary,
some few of you are probably favoured by Fate and
Fortune, while others are the reverse. I say nothing
of the fact that you are carried off by pirates even
as we are, and plundered by temple-robbers, and from
very rich become very poor in a second; and many

 

have even been melted down before now, being of
gold or silver ; but of course they were fated for this.

ZEUS 
See here, your talk is getting insulting, Cyniscus,
and you will perhaps regret it some day.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Be chary of your threats, Zeus, for you know that
nothing can happen to me which Fate has not
decreed before you. I see that even the templerobbers I mentioned are not punished, but most of
them escape you; it was not fated, I suppose, that
they should be caught !
 
 ZEUS 
Didn’t I say you were one of those fellows that
abolish Providence in debate ?
 
 CYNISCUS 
You are very much afraid of them, Zeus, I don’t
know why. At any rate, you think that everything I
say is one of their tricks.

I should like to ask you,
though—for from whom can I learn the truth except
from you ?—what this Providence of yours is, a Fate
or a goddess, as it were, superior to the Fates, ruling
even over them?
 
 ZEUS 
I have already told you that it is not permitted
you to know everything. At first you said that you
would ask me only one question, but you keep
chopping all this logic with me, and I see that in
your eyes the chief object of this talk is to show
that we exert no providence at all in human affairs.
 
 CYNISCUS 
That is none of my doing: you yourself said not
long ago that it was the Fates who brought every-

 

thing to pass. But perhaps you repent of it and
take back what you said, and you gods lay claim
to the oversight, thrusting the Fates aside ?

ZEUS 
By no means, but Fate does it all through us.
 
 CYNISCUS 
I understand ; you allege that you are servants and
assistants of the Fates. But even at that, the
providence would be theirs, and you are only their
instruments and tools, as it were.
 
 ZEUS 
What do you mean?
 
 CYNISCUS 
You are in the same case, I suppose, as the adze
and the drill of the carpenter, which help him
somewhat in his craft, and yet no one would say that
they are the craftsman or that the ship is the work
of the adze or the drill, but of the shipwright. Well,
in like manner it is Destiny who does all the building
and you at most are only drills and adzes of the
Fates, and I believe men ought to sacrifice to
Destiny and ask their blessings ‘from her instead of
going to you and exalting you with processions and
sacrifices. But no: even if they honoured Destiny
they would not be doing so to any purpose, for I don’t
suppose it is possible even for the Fates themselves
to alter or reverse any of their original decrees about
each man. Atropos, at all events, would not put up
with it if anyone should turn the spindle backwards
and undo the work of Clotho.

ZEUS 
Have you gone so far, Cyniscus, as to think that
even the Fates should not be honoured by men?
Why, you seem inclined to upset everything. As for
us gods, if for no other reason, we may fairly be
honoured because we are soothsayers and foretell all
that the Fates have established.
 
 CYNISCUS 
On the whole, Zeus, it does no good to have
foreknowledge of future events when people are
completely unable to guard against them,—unless
perhaps you maintain that a man who knows in
advance that he is to die by an iron spear-head can
escape death by shutting himself up? No, it is impossible, for Fate will take him out hunting and
deliver him up to the spear-head, and Adrastus,
throwing his weapon at the boar, will miss it and
slay the son of Croesus, as if the javelin were sped
at the lad by a powerful cast of the Fates.

Indeed,
the oracle of Laius is really ridiculous :
 Sow not the birth-field in the gods’ despite, 

 For if thou get’st, thy son will lay thee low. 
 Euripides, Phoenissae, 18-19 

It was superfluous, I take it, to caution against what
was bound to be so in any event. Consequently
after the oracle he sowed his seed and his son laid
him low. I don’t see, therefore, on what ground you
demand your fee for making prophecies.

I say
nothing of the fact that you are accustomed to give
most people perplexed and ambiguous responses,
not making it at all clear whether the man who


 

crosses the Halys will cause the loss of his own
kingdom or that of Cyrus; for the oracle can be
taken in either sense. 
 
 ZEUS 
Apollo had some reason for being angry at Croesus
because he had tested him by stewing lamb and
turtle together. 
 CYNISCUS 
He should not have been angry, being a god.
However, the very deception of the Lydian was predetermined, I suppose, and in general our lack of
definite information about the future is due to the
spindle of Destiny; so even your soothsaying is in
her province.

ZEUS 
Then you leave nothing for us, and we are gods to
no purpose, not contributing any providence to the
world and not deserving our sacrifices, like drills or
adzes in very truth? Indeed, it seems to me that
you scorn me with reason, because although, as_ you
see, I have a thunderbolt clenched in my hand, I am
letting you say all this against us.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Strike, Zeus, if it is fated that I am really to be
struck by lightning, and I won’t blame you for the
stroke but Clotho, who inflicts the injury through

 

you; for even the thunderbolt itself, I should say,
would not be the cause of the injury. There is
another question, however, which I will put to you
and to Destiny, and you can answer for her. You have
put me in mind of it by your threat.

Why in the
world is it that, letting off the temple-robbers and
pirates and so many who are insolent and violent
and forsworn, you repeatedly blast an oak or a stone
or the mast of a harmless ship, and now and then
an honest and pious wayfarer? Why are you silent,
Zeus? Isn’t it permitted me to know this, either ?
 
 ZEUS 
No, Cyniscus. You are a meddler, and I can’t
conceive where you got together all this stuff that
you bring me.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Then I am not to put my other question to you
and to Providence and Destiny, why in the world is
it that honest Phocion and Aristides before him died
in so great poverty and want, while Callias and
Alcibiades, a lawless pair of lads, and high-handed
Midias and Charops of Aegina, a lewd fellow who
starved his mother to death, were all exceeding rich ;
and again, why is it that Socrates was given over to
the Eleven instead of Meletus, and that Sardanapalus,
ffeminate as he was, occupied the throne, while
Goches, a man of parts, was crucified by him because
ie did not like what went on—

not to speak in detail
f the present state of affairs, when the wicked and
he selfish are happy and the good are driven about

 

from pillar to post, caught in the pinch of poverty
and disease and other ills without number ?
 
 ZEUS 
Why, don’t you know, Cyniscus, what punishments
await the wicked when life is over, and in what happiness the good abide ?
 
 CYNISCUS 
Do you talk to me of Hades and of Tityus and
Tantalus and their like? For my part, when I die I
shall find out for certain whether there is really any
such thing, but for the present I prefer to live out
my time in happiness, however short it may be, and
then have my liver torn by sixteen vultures after my
death, rather than go as thirsty as Tantalus here
on earth and do my drinking in the Isles of the
Blest, lying at my ease among the heroes in the
Elysian Fields.

ZEUS 
What’s that you say? Don’t you believe that
there are any punishments and rewards, and a court
where each man’s life is scrutinized !
 
 CYNISCUS 
I hear that somebody named Minos, a Cretan, acts
as judge in such matters down below. And please
answer me a question on his behalf, for he is your
son, they say.
 
 ZEUS 
What have you to ask him, Cyniscus?
 
 CYNISCUS 
Whom does he punish principally ?
 
 ZEUS 
wicked, of course, such as murderers and
temple-robbers.

 

 CYNISCUS 
And whom does he send to join the heroes ?
 
 ZEUS 
Those who were good and pious and lived
virtuously.
 
 CYNISCUS 
Why is that, Zeus?
 
 ZEUS 
Because the latter deserve reward and the former
punishment.
 
 CYNISCUS 
But if a man should do a dreadful thing unintentionally, would he think it right to punish him like
the others ?
 
 ZEUS 
Not by any means.
 
 CYNISCUS 
I suppose, then, if a man did something good unintentionally, he would not think fit to reward him,
either ?
 
 ZEUS 
Certainly not!
 
 CYNISCUS 
Then, Zeus, he ought not to reward or punish
anyone.
 
 ZEUS 
Why not?
 
 CYNISCUS 
Because we men do nothing of our own accord.
but only at the behest of some inevitable necessity,
if what you previously admitted is true, that Fate is
the cause of everything If a man slay, it is she
who slays, and if he rob temples, he only does it

 

under orders. Therefore if Minos were to judge
justly, he would punish Destiny instead of Sisyphus
and Fate instead of Tantalus, for what wrong did
they do in obeying orders?

ZEUS 
It isn’t proper to answer you any longer when you
ask such questions. You are an impudent fellow
and a sophist, and I shall go away and leave you
now. ;
 
 CYNISCUS 
I wanted to ask you just this one question, where
the Fates live and how they go into such minute detail in attending to so much business, when there
are only three of them. There is much labour and
little- good-fortune in the life they live, I think, with
all the cares they have, and Destiny, it would
appear, was not too gracious when they themselves
were born. At any rate if I were given a chance to
choose, I would not exchange my life for theirs, but
should prefer to be still poorer all my days rather
than sit and twirl a spindle freighted with so many
events, watching each carefully. But if it is not
easy for you to answer me these questions, Zeus,
I shall content myself with the answers you have
given, for they are full enough to throw light on the
doctrine of Destiny and Providence. The rest,
perhaps, I was not fated to hear !