INTRODUCTION 
 
					This slight and possibly fragmentary essay, or declamation,
					makes no considerable addition to the
					theory of knowledge. Virtue is assumed to be an
					 art ; since the practice of all other arts is unsuccessful
					without instruction, Virtue ( ἀρετή ), or the
					Good Life ( τὸ εὖ ζῆν ), or Prudence ( φρόνησις ) - for
					Plutarch appears to equate the three - must be
					learned, if we are to be successful in the dependent
					arts. Plutarch appeals as usual to common sense,
					but does not take the trouble to prove any of his
					assumptions; yet the work, even in its present
					mutilated state, is a graceful exercise in popular
					philosophy.
				 
 
					While Plutarch's slipshod and half-defined position
					is not directly contrary to that of Plato ( e.g. in the
					 Meno ), it must be observed that two pupils of Socrates,
					Crito and Simon, wrote works with the titles, οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ μαθεῖν οἱ ἀγαθοί ( That Men are not made
						Good by Instruction ) and Περὶ ἀρετῆς ὅτι οὐ διδακτόν 
					( That Virtue cannot be Taught ), respectively. Whether
					these books differed radically from the Platonic or
					Socratic position, as developed in the Meno and the
					 Republic , cannot be argued here.
				 
 
					We must note in passing that G. Siefert ( Commentationes
						Ienenses , 1896, pp. 102-105) held that Plutarch
					
					 
					
					wrote this work in connexion with the De Fortuna (see
					the parallels recorded in the notes) and that it is not
					mutilated, but unfinished. This is quite possible. 
				 
 
					The text is very uncertain, for although the essay
					appears in several important classes of MSS., they differ
					considerably among themselves. The text which
					must serve as the basis of the present translation is
					only presented with the greatest hesitation.
				 
 
					The work appears as No. 180 in the Lamprias
					catalogue, where it bears the title Περὶ ἀρετῆς εἰ διδκτέον ἡ ἀρετή .

When we discuss Virtue we debate the question
					whether Prudence, Justice, and the Good Life can be
					taught; then we are surprised that the achievements of orators, pilots, musicians, architects, and
					farmers are past counting, whereas good men is
					only a name and a mere term, like Centaurs, 
					 Giants, or Cyclopes ! And it is impossible to
					find any deed that is faultless as regards its virtue,
					or any character undefiled by passion, or any life
					untouched by dishonour; but even if Nature does
					spontaneously produce something that is excellent,
					this excellence is obscured by much that is foreign
					to it, like wheat mixed with wild and impure stuff. 
					Men learn to play the harp, to dance and to read,
					to farm and to ride the horse; they learn to put on
					shoes and to don garments, they are taught to pour
					wine and to bake meat. All these things it is impossible to do properly without instruction; but shall
					that for the attainment of which all these things
					are done, that is, the Good Life, be unteachable,
					irrational, requiring no skill, and fortuitous?

O mortal men! Why do we assert that virtue
					
					 
					
					is unteachable, and thus make it non-existent?
					For if learning begets virtue, the prevention of learning destroys it. Yet truly, as Plato says, just
					because a foot of verse is out of measure with the lyre
					and fails to harmonize with it, brother does not war
					with brother, nor does friend quarrel with friend, nor
					do states conceive hatred toward other states and
					wreak upon each other the most extreme injuries and
					suffer them as well; nor can anyone say that civil
					strife has ever broken out in a state over a question
					of accent, as, for instance, whether we should read
					Telchines or Telchines, nor that a quarrel has ever
					arisen in a household between husband and wife as
					to which is the warp and which the woof. Yet, for all
					that, no one, unless he has received instruction, would
					attempt to handle a loom or a book or a lyre, though
					he would suffer no great harm if he did so, but he is
					merely afraid of becoming ridiculous (for, as Heracleitus 
 	says, It is better to conceal ignorance );
					but everyone thinks that without instruction he will
					handle successfully a home, a marriage, a commonwealth, a magistracy - though he has not learned how
					to get along with wife, or servant, or fellow-citizen,
					or subject, or ruler!
				 
 
					Diogenes, when he saw a child eating sweet-meats,
					gave the boy's tutor a cuff, rightly judging the fault
					to be, not that of him who had not learned, but of
					him who had not taught. Then, when it is impossible
					
					 
					
					to eat and drink politely in company if one has not
					learned from childhood, as Aristophanes says,
					 
 Not to laugh like a clown, nor dainties gulp down, nor to
						 
 cross one leg on the other; 
 
					yet can men enter without censure the fellowship of a
					household, a city, a marriage, a way of life, a magistracy, if they have not learned how they should get
					along with fellow-beings? When Aristippus was
					asked by someone, So you are everywhere, it seems,
						aren't you? 
 Well then, he replied with a laugh,
					 I am wasting my fare, if indeed I am everywhere. 
					Why, then, would you also not say, If men do not
						become better by teaching, the fee given to their
						tutors is wasted ? For these are the first to receive
					the child when it has been weaned and, just as nurses
					mould its body with their hands, so tutors by the
					habits they inculcate train the child's character to take
					a first step, as it were, on the path of virtue. So the
					Spartan, when he was asked what he effected by his
					teaching, said, I make honourable things pleasant
						to children. And yet what do tutors teach? To
					walk in the public streets with lowered head; to
					touch salt-fish with but one finger, but fresh fish,
					bread, and meat with two ; to sit in such and such
					a posture; in such and such a way to wear their
					cloaks.

What then? He who says that the physician's
					art concerns itself with rashes and hang-nails, but
					not with pleurisy or fever or inflammation of the
					brain, in what does he differ from one who says that
					schools and lectures and precepts are for instruction
					in trifling and childish duties, but that for the great
					and supreme duties there is only brute knocking
					about and accident? For just as he is ridiculous
					who declares that one must be taught before pulling
					at the oar, but may steer the boat even without
					having learned; so one who grants that the other
					arts are acquired by learning, but deprives virtue of
					this, appears to be acting directly contrary to the
					practice of the Scythians. For the Scythians, as
					Herodotus says, blind their slaves that these may
					hand over the cream to themselves; but such a man
					as this gives Reason, like an eye, as it were, to the
					subservient and ancillary arts, while denying it to
					virtue.
				 
 
					Yet when Callias, son of Charias, asked the general
					Iphicrates, 
 Who are you? Bowman, targeteer,
						horseman, or hoplite? Iphicrates replied, None
							of these, but the one who commands them all. 
					Ridiculous, therefore, is the man who declares that
					the art of using the bow, or of fighting in heavy
					armour, or of manipulating the sling, or of riding
					a horse may be taught, but that the art of commanding and leading an army comes as it chances
					and to whom it chances without previous instruction!
					Surely he is yet more ridiculous who affirms that
					prudence alone cannot be taught, for without prudence
					
					 
					
					there can be no gain or profit from the other
					arts. But if prudence is in command, the principle
					which orders all the arts, which assigns each person
					to a place of usefulness, what joy, for instance, can
					one have at a banquet, though the servants are welltrained and have learned to
					 Carve the meat and roast it well and pour the wine, 
 
					if there be no system nor order in the servitors?