Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to
those who are called, sanctified by God the Father, and kept for Jesus
Christ:

Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.

Beloved, while I was very eager to write to you about our
common salvation, I was constrained to write to you exhorting you to
contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the
saints.

For there are certain men who crept in secretly, even
those who were long ago written about for this condemnation: ungodly
men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying our
only Master, God, and Lord, Jesus Christ.

Now I desire to remind you, though you already know this, that
the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed those who didn't believe.

Angels who didn't keep their
first domain, but deserted their own dwelling place, he has kept in
everlasting bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day.

Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, having,
in the same way as these, given themselves over to sexual immorality
and gone after strange flesh, are set forth as an example, suffering
the punishment of eternal fire.

Yet in like manner these also in
their dreaming defile the flesh, despise authority, and slander
celestial beings.

But Michael, the archangel, when contending
with the devil and arguing about the body of Moses, dared not bring
against him an abusive condemnation, but said, "May the Lord rebuke
you!"

But these speak evil of whatever things they don't know.
What they understand naturally, like the creatures without reason, in
these things are they destroyed.

Woe to them! For they went in
the way of Cain, and ran riotously in the error of Balaam for hire, and
perished in Korah's rebellion.

These are hidden rocky reefs in
your love feasts when they feast with you, shepherds who without fear
feed themselves; clouds without water, carried along by winds; autumn
leaves without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;

wild
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for
whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.

About
these also Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, "Behold,
the Lord came with ten thousands of his holy ones,

to execute
judgment on all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their works of
ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way, and of all the hard
things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him."

These are
murmurers and complainers, walking after their lusts (and their mouth
speaks proud things), showing respect of persons to gain advantage.

But you, beloved, remember the words which have been spoken
 before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.

They said to
you that "In the last time there will be mockers, walking after their
own ungodly lusts."

These are they who cause divisions, and are
 sensual, not having the Spirit.

But you, beloved, keep building
 up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit.

Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
 Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.

On some have compassion,
 making a distinction,

and some save, snatching them out of the
 fire with fear, hating even the clothing stained by the flesh.

Now to him who is able to keep them from stumbling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory in great joy,

to God our Savior, who alone is wise, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen.