APOLLO 
Is the report true, father, that someone threw
himself bodily into the fire, in the very face of the
Olympic festivities, quite an elderly man, not a bad
hand at such hocus-pocus? Selene told me, saying
that she herself had seen him burning. 
 ZEUS 
Yes, quite true, Apollo. If only it had never
happened!
 
 APOLLO 
Was the old man so good? Was he not worthy of
a death by fire?
 
 ZEUS 
Yes, that he was, very likely. But my point is
that I remember having had to put up with a great
deal of annoyance at the time on account of a horrid
stench such as you might expect to arise from roasting
human bodies. In fact, if I had not at once gone
straight to Araby, I should have come to a sad end,




 

you may depend on it, from the awfulness of the
reek. Even as it was, amid all that fragrance and
abundance of sweet scents, with frankincense in
profusion, my nostrils hardly consented to forget and
unlearn the taint of that odour; why, even now I
almost retch at the memory of it!

APOLLO 
What was his idea, Zeus, in doing that to himself,
or what was the good of his getting incinerated by
jumping into the blazing pyre?
 
 ZEUS 
Well, that criticism, my boy, you had better
address first to Empedocles, who himself sprung into
that crater in Sicily.
 
 APOLLO 
A terrible case of melancholia, that! But this
man—what reason in the world did he have for
wanting to do it?
 
 ZEUS 
I will repeat for you a speech of his own, which he
delivered to the assembled pilgrims, defending himself before them for putting an end to himself.

He
said, if my memory serves me—But who is this
woman coming up in haste, excited and tearful, like
someone suffering great wrongs? Stay, it is Philosophy, and she is calling upon me by name, in bitterness of spirit. Why the tears, my daughter? Why
have you left the world and come here? Surely it
cannot be that the common sort have once again
combined against you as before, when they put

 

Socrates to death through a charge brought by
Anytus, and that you are fleeing from them for that
reason?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
Nothing of the sort, father. On the contrary,
they—the multitude—spoke well of me and held me
in honour, respecting, admiring, and all but worshipping me, even if they did not much understand what
I said. But the others—how shall I style them?—
those who say they are my familiars and friends and
creep under the cloak of my name, they are the
people who have done me the direst possible injuries.

ZEUS 
Have the philosophers made a plot against you?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
By no means, father. Why, they themselves have
been wronged in common with me!
 
 ZEUS 
At whose hands, then, have you been wronged,
if you have no fault to find either with the common
sort or with the philosophers ?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
There are some, Zeus, who occupy a middle ground
between the multitude and the philosophers. In
deportment, glance, and gait they are like us, and
similarly dressed; as a matter of fact, they want to
be enlisted under my command and they enroll themselves under my name, saying that they are my
pupils, disciples, and devotees. Nevertheless, their

 

abominable way of living, full of ignorance, impudence, and wantonness, is no trifling outrage against
me. Itis they, father, who have inflicted the wrongs
that have made me flee.

ZEUS 
This is a sad state of affairs, daughter. But in
just what way have they wronged you?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
See for yourself, father, whether the wrongs are
trifling. When you observed that the life of man was
full of wrongdoing and transgression because stupidity
and high-handedness were ingrained in it, and
disturbed it, you pitied humanity, harried as it was
by ignorance, and therefore sent me down, enjoining
me to see to it that they should stop wronging each
other, doing violence, and living like beasts; that
they should instead fix their eyes on the verities and
manage their society more peaceably. Anyhow, you
said to me in sending me down: “What men do
and how they are affected by stupidity, daughter,
you see for yourself. I pity them, and so, as I think
that you alone might be able to cure what is going
on, I have selected you from among us all and send
you to effect the cure.”

ZEUS 
I know I said a great deal at the time, including all
this. But go on and tell me what followed, how they
received you when you flew down for the first time
and what has befallen you now at their hands.

 

 PHILOSOPHY 
When I sped off, father, I did not head for the
Greeks straightway, but as it seemed to me the more
difficult part of my task to educate and instruct the
foreigners, I decided to do that first ; the Greek world
I let be, as possible to subject very easily and likely
(I thought so, anyhow) to take the bridle and submit
to the harness very soon. Making for the Indians
to begin with, the most numerous population in the
world, I had na difficulty about persuading them to
come down off their elephants and associate with
me. Consequently, a whole tribe, the Brahmans,
who border upon the Nechraei and the Oxydracae, 
are all enlisted under my command and not only live
in accordance with my tenets, honoured by all their
neighbours, but die a marvellous kind of death.

ZEUS 
You mean the gymnosophists. Anyhow, I am
told, among other things about them, that they
ascend a very lofty pyre and endure cremation without any change in their outward appearance or their
sitting position. But that is nothing much. Just
now, for example, at Olympia I saw the same sort of
thing done, and very likely you too were there at the
time when the old man was burned.




 

 PHILOSOPHY 
I did not even go to Olympia, father, for fear of
those detestable fellows whom I spoke of, since I
saw many of them taking their way there in order to
upbraid the assembled pilgrims and fill the back room
of the temple with the noise of their howling. 
Consequently, I did not see how he died.

But to resume—after the Brahmans I went direct
to Ethiopia, and then down to Egypt; and after
associating with their priests and prophets and
instructing them in religion, I departed for Babylon,
to initiate Chaldeans and Magi; then from there to
Scythia, and then to Thrace, where I conversed with
Eumolpus and Orpheus, whom I sent in advance to
Greece, one of them, Eumolpus, to give them the
mysteries, as he had learned all about religion from
me, and the other to win them over by the witchery
of his music. Then I followed at once on their
heels.

Just at first, on my arrival, the Greeks neither
welcomed me very warmly nor shut the door in m
face outright. But gradually, as I associated wit
them, I attached to myself seven companions and
pupils from among them all; then another from
Samos, another from Ephesus, and one more from
Abdera—only a few in all.

After them, the Sophist tribe somehow or other
fastened themselves to my skirts. They were
neither profoundly interested in my teaching nor




 

altogether at variance, but like the Hippocentaur
breed, something composite and mixed, astray in the
interspace between quackery and philosophy, neither
completely addicted to ignorance nor yet able to keep
me envisioned with an intent gaze; being purblind,
as it were, through their dim-sightedness they merely
glimpsed at times an indistinct, dim presentment or
shadow of me, yet thought they had discerned everything with accuracy. So there flared up among them
that useless and superfluous “wisdom” of theirs,
in their own opinion invincible—those clever, baffling,
absurd replies and perplexing, mazy queries.

Then,
on being checked and shown up by my comrades,
they were indignant and combined against them, at
length bringing them before courts and handing
them over to drink the hemlock. I ought perhaps
at that time to have fled incontinently, no longer
putting up with their company; but Antisthenes
and Diogenes, and presently Crates and Menippus,
ou know, persuaded me to mete them out an
additional modicum of delay. O that I had not done
so! for I should not have undergone such sufferings
later.

ZEUS 
You have not yet told me what wrongs have been
done you, Philosophy; you merely vent your
indignation.


 

 PHILOSOPHY 
But do listen, Zeus, and hear how great they
are. There is an abominable class of men, for the
most part slaves and hirelings, who had nothing to do
with me in childhood for lack of leisure, since they
were performing the work of slaves or hirelings or
learning such trades as you would expect their like
to learn—cobbling, building, busying themselves with
fuller’s tubs, or carding wool to make it easy for the
women to work, easy to wind, and easy to draw off
when they twist a yarn or spin a thread. Well, while
they were following such occupations in youth, they
did not even know my name. But when they began
to be reckoned as adults and noticed how much respect
my companions have from the multitude and how men
tolerate their plain-speaking, delight in their ministrations, hearken to their advice, and cower under
their censure, they considered all this to be a
suzerainty of no mean order.

Now to learn all that is requisite for such a calling
would have been a long task, say rather an impossible
one. Their trades, however, were petty, laborious,
and barely able to supply them with just enough.
To some, moreover, servitude seemed grievous and
(as indeed it is) intolerable. It seemed best to them,
therefore, as they reflected upon the matter, to let
go their last anchor, which men that sail the seas call
the “sacred” one; so, resorting to good old Desperation, inviting the support, too, of Hardihood,
Stupidity, and Shamelessness, who are their principal
partisans, and committing to memory novel terms of
abuse, in order to have them at hand and at their


 

tongue’s end, with these as their only countersigns
(you perceive what a rare equipment it is for philosophy), they very plausibly transform themselves in
looks and apparel to counterfeit my very self, doing,
I vow, the same sort of thing that Aesop says the
jackass in Cyme did, who put on a lion skin and began
to bray harshly, claiming to be a lion himself; and
no doubt there were actually some who believed
him!

What characterises us is very easily attainable, as
you know, and open to imitation—I mean what
meets the eye. It does not require much ceremony
to don a short cloak, sling on a wallet, carry a staff in
one’s hand, and shout—say rather, bray, or howl,
and slang everyone. Assurance of not suffering for
it was bound to be afforded them by the usual respect
for the cloth. Freedom is in prospect, against the
will of their master, who, even if he should care to
assert possession by force, would get beaten with the
staff. Bread, too, is no longer scanty or, as before,
limited to bannocks of barley ; and what goes with it
is not salt fish or thyme but meat of all sorts and wine
of the sweetest, and money from whomsoever they
will; for they collect tribute, going from house to
house, or, as they themselves express it, they “shear
the sheep”; and they expect many to give, either
out of respect for their cloth or for fear of their
abusive language.

Moreover, they discerned, I assume, the further
advantage that they would be on an equal footing
with true philosophers, and that there would be
nobody who could pass judgment and draw distinctions in such matters, if only the externals were
similar. For, to begin with, they do not even

 

tolerate investigation if you question them ever so
temperately and concisely; at once they begin
shouting and take refuge in their peculiar citadel,
abusiveness and a ready staff. Also, if you ask about
their works, their words are copious, and if you wish
to judge them by their words, they want you to
consider their lives.

Consequently, every city is filled with such upstarts, particularly with those who enter the names
of Diogenes, Antisthenes, and Crates as their patrons
and enlist in the army ofthe dog. Those fellows have
not in any way imitated the good that there is in the
nature of dogs, as, for instance, guarding property,
keeping at home, loving their masters, or remembering kindnesses, but their barking, gluttony, thievishness, excessive interest in females, truckling, fawning
upon people who give them things, and hanging
about tables—all this they have copied with painful
accuracy.

You shall see what will happen presently. All the
men in the workshops will spring to their feet and
leave their trades deserted when they see that by
toiling and moiling from morning till night, doubled
over their tasks, they merely eke out a bare existence
from such wage-earning, while idle frauds live in
unlimited plenty, asking for things in a lordly way,
getting them without effort, acting indignant if they
do not, and bestowing no praise even if they do. It
seems to them that this is ‘life in the age of Cronus,’
and really that sheer honey is distilling into their
mouths from the sky!

The thing would not be so dreadful if they offended
against us only by being what they are. But
although outwardly and in public they appear very

 

reverend and stern, if they get a handsome boy
or a pretty woman in their clutches or hope to, it is
best to veil their conduct in silence. Some even
carry off the wives of their hosts, to seduce them after
the pattern of that young Trojan, pretending that
the women are going to become philosophers; then
they tender them, as common property, to all their
associates and think they are carrying out a tenet of
Plato’s, when they do not know on what terms that
holy man thought it right for women to be so
regarded.

What they do at drinking-parties, how
intoxicated they become, would make a long story.
And while they do all this, you cannot imagine how
they berate drunkenness and adultery and lewdness
and covetousness. Indeed you could not find any
two things so opposed to each other as their words
and their deeds. For instance, they claim to hate
toadying, when as far as that goes they are able to
outdo Gnathonides or Struthias; and although
they exhort everyone else to tell the truth, they
themselves cannot so much as move their tongues
except ina lie. To all of them pleasure is nominally
an odious thing and Epicurus a foeman; but in
practice they do everything for the sake of it. In
irascibility, pettishness, and proneness to anger they
are beyond young children ; indeed, they give no little
amusement to onlookers when their blood boils up in






 

them for some trivial reason, so that they look livid in
colour, with a reckless, insane stare, and foam (or
rather, venom) fills their mouths.

And “may you never chance to be there” when
that vile filth of theirs is exuded! “As to gold or
silver, Heracles! I do not want even to ownit. An
obol is enough, so that I can buy lupines, for a spring
or a stream will supply me with drink.” Then after
a little they demand, not obols nor a few drachmas,
but whole fortunes. What shipman could make as
much from his cargoes as philosophy contributes
to these fellows in the way of gain? And then,
when they have levied tribute and stocked themselves up to their heart’s content, throwing off
that ill-conditioned philosopher’s cloak, they buy
farms every now and then, and luxurious clothing, and long-haired pages, and whole apartmenthouses, bidding a long farewell to the wallet of
Crates, the mantle of Antisthenes, and the jar of
Diogenes.

The unschooled, seeing all this, now spit scornfully at philosophy, thinking that all of us are like
this and blaming me for my teachings, so that for
a long time now it has been impossible for me
to win over a single one of them. I am in the
same fix as Penelope, for truly all that I weave
is instantly unravelled again; and Stupidity and
Wrongdoing laugh in my face to see that I cannot
bring my work to completion and my toil to an
end.

ZEUS 
Ye gods! what treatment our dear Philosophy has
had from those scoundrels! It is high time, then,
to see what is to be done and how they are to be
punished. Well, the thunderbolt despatches at a
single blow, and the death is a swift one.
 
 APOLLO 
I will offer you a suggestion, father, for I myself
have come to detest the knaves; the Muses mean
nothing to them, so I am indignant on behalf of the
Nine. Those fellows are by no means worthy of a
thunderbolt or of that right hand of yours. Send
Hermes down to get after them, if you think best,
with unlimited powers in the matter of their punishment. As he himself is interested in argumentation,
he will very soon know those who are genuine students
of philosophy and those who are not. Then he will
commend the former, naturally, and the latter will
be punished as he sees fit in the circumstances.

ZEUS 
A good idea, Apollo. But you go too, Heracles;
take along Philosophy herself and all be off, as
quickly as you can, to the world. Bear in mind
that you will be doing a thirteenth labour of no mean
order if you exterminate such pestilential, shameless
beasts.
 
 HERACLES 
On my word, father, I should have preferred to
clean out the muck of Augeas once more, rather than
to get involved with these creatures. Let us be off,
however.

 

 PHILOSOPHY 
I do not want to go with you, but I must, in
accordance with father’s orders.

HERMES 
Let us be going down, so that we may exterminate
at least a few of them to-day. What direction should
we take, Philosophy? You know where they are.
In Greece, no doubt?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
Not by any means, or only a few, those who are
genuine students of philosophy, Hermes. These
others have no use for Attic poverty; we must look
for them in some quarter where much gold or silver
is mined.
 
 HERMES 
Then we must make straight for Thrace.
 
 HERACLES 
Quite right, and indeed I will show you the way,
as I know the whole of Thrace from repeated visits.
So, if you please, let us now take this direction.
 
 HERMES 
What direction do you mean?

HERACLES 
Do you see two ranges, Hermes and Philosophy,
the highest and most beautiful of all mountains (the
higher is Haemus, the one opposite is Rhodope), and
a plain of great fertility outspread beneath them,
beginning at the very foothills of each? Also,


 

three very beautiful eminences standing up, not so
rough as to be shapeless? They look like multiple
citadels belonging to the city beneath them. For the
city, too, is now in sight.
 
 HERMES 
Yes, by Zeus, Heracles, the greatest and loveliest
of all cities! In fact, its beauty is radiant from afar.
And also, a very large river flows past it, coming quite
close to it.
 
 HERACLES 
That is the Hebrus, and the city was built by the
famous Philip. We are now close to earth and the
clouds are above us, so let us make a landing, with
the blessing of Heaven.

HERMES 
Very well. But what is to be done now? How
are we to track the beasts out?
 
 HERACLES 
That is up to you, Hermes; you are a crier, so be
quick and do your office.
 
 HERMES 
Nothing hard about that, but I do not know their
names. Tell me, Philosophy, what I am to call them,
and their marks of identification as well.
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
I myself do not know for certain what they are
called, because of my not having had anything to do
with them ever. But to judge from the craving for


 

riches which they have, you will not make any mistake
if you call them Richman or Richmews or Richrenown
or Goodrich or Richards.

HERMES 
Right you are.—But who are these people and why
are they too looking about them? However, they
are coming up and want to ask a question.
 
 HUSBAND 
Could you tell us, gentlemen, or you, kind lady,
whether you have seen three rogues together, and a
woman with her hair closely clipped in the Spartan
style, boyish-looking and quite masculine ?
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
Aha! They are looking for our quarry!
 
 HUSBAND 
How yours? Those fellows are all fugitive slaves,
and for my part I am particularly in search of the
woman, whom they have kidnapped.
 
 HERMES 
You will soon find out why we are in search of
them. But at present let us make a joint proclamation.
«If anyone has seen a Paphlagonian slave, one of
those barbarians from Sinope, with a name of the
kind that has ‘rich’ in it, sallow, close-cropped, 
wearing a long beard, with a wallet slung from his
shoulder and a short cloak about him, quick-


 

tempered, uneducated, harsh-voiced, and abusive,
let him give information for the stipulated reward.”

FIRST SLAVE-OWNER
Your proclamation does not tally, man! His name
when I had him was Scarabee; furthermore, he
wore his hair long, kept his chin hairless, and knew my
trade. It was his business to sit in my fuller’s shop
and shear off the excessive nap that makes cloaks
fuzzy.
 
 PHILOSOPHY 
That is the very man, your slave; but now he
looks like a philosopher, for he has given himself a
thorough dry-cleaning.
FIRST SLAVE-OWNER (to Second and Third)
The impudence of him! Scarabee is setting up
for a philosopher, she says, and we do not enter into
his speculations at all!

SECOND SLAVE-OWNER
Never mind, we shall find them all, for this woman
knows them, by what she says.
 
 HERMES 
Who is this other person coming up, Heracles,
the handsome man with the lyre?
 
 HERACLES 
It is Orpheus, my shipmate on the Argo, the
most tuneful of all chanteymen. Indeed, as we
rowed to his singing, we hardly grew tired at all.

 

Good-day to you, Orpheus, best of men and first of
musicians. Surely you have not forgotten Heracles.
 
 ORPHEUS 
A very good-day to you also, Philosophy, Heracles,
and Hermes. But the time has come to pay your
reward, since I am very well acquainted with the
man for whom you are looking.
 
 HERMES 
Then show us where he is, son of Calliope, for you
have no need of gold, I take it, being a wise man.
 
 ORPHEUS 
You are right. I will show you the house where
he lives, but not the man himself, so as not to be
slanged by him. He is excessively foul-mouthed;
that is the only thing he has thoroughly mastered.
 
 HERMES 
Only show us.
 
 ORPHEUS 
Here it is, close by. I am going away from your
neighbourhood, so that I may not even see him.

PHILOSOPHY 
Hold! Is not that the voice of a woman, reciting
something of Homer’s?
 
 HERMES 
Yes, surely; but let us hear what she is saying.

 

 WOMAN 
Hateful to me that man, no less than the portals of
Hades,
Who in his heart loves gold, and yet maintains that
he does not. 
 HERMES 
Then you must needs hate Scarabee !
 
 WOMAN 
Ever his host he abuseth, if anyone showeth him
kindness. 
 HUSBAND 
That verse refers to me, for he went off with my
wife because I took him in.
 
 WOMAN 
Heavy with wine, dog-eyed, with the timid heart of
a roe-deer,
Never of any account in the fray or in giving of
counsel,
Loose-mouthed fool, Thersites, of evil jackdaws the
foremost *
Idle strife with kings to promote in no spirit of
order! 8
FIRST SLAVE-OWNER
The verses just fit the scoundrel !



 

 WOMAN 
 
 Dog in the fore-parts, aye, and a lion behind; in the middle a she-goat, 
 Shedding the terrible reek of the third dog’s furious onslaught!

HUSBAND 
Dear me, wife! how outrageously you have been
treated by all those dogs! It is even said that they
have lined her.
 
 HERMES 
No fear, you will soon have her bringing into the
world a Cerberus or a Geryon, to make more work
for Heracles here. —But they are coming out, so
there is no need to knock at the door.
FIRST SLAVE-OWNER
I’ve got you, Scarabee! Now you have nothing
to say, have you? Come, let us see what your wallet.
has in it, lupines, no doubt, or a crust of bread. No,
by Zeus! A purse of gold!
 
 HERACLES 
Don’t be surprised! Formerly, in Greece, he
claimed to be a Cynic, but here he reveals himself
in his true colours as a Chrysippean. Therefore you



 

shall soon see him a Cleanthes, for he is going to be
hung up by the beard because he is such a villain.

SECOND SLAVE-OWNER
And you, scoundrel! are you not Pomander, who
ran away from me? Nobody else! O how you
make me laugh! After that, what cannot happen?
Even Pomander a philosopher !
 
 HERMES 
This third fellow—has he no master among you?
THIRD SLAVE-OWNER
Yes, I am his master, but even so, I gladly consign him to perdition !
Why?
 
 HERMES 
THIRD SLAVE-OWNER
Because he is a fearful sort of rotter. The name
we used to call him was Stinkadore.
 
 HERMES 
Heracles, deliver us! do you hear that? And
then wallet and staff! Here, you! (to HusBaNpD)
Take away your wife, yourself!


 

 HUSBAND 
Never in the world! I don’t care to take her
away with an old book under her apron.
 
 HERMES 
Book? What do you mean?
 
 HUSBAND 
My dear fellow, there is a book called Tricipitine. 
 HERMES 
Nothing surprising in that, as there is one called
Triphallic.

PHILOSOPHY 
It is for you, Hermes, to give judgement now.
 
 HERMES 
This is my decision. As for the woman, to insure
against her bringing into the world anything portentous or many-headed, she shall go back to Greece
to live with her husband. This pair of runaway
slaves shall be turned over to their masters and
continue to learn their former trades; Pomander
to wash dirty linen, Stinkadore once again to mend
torn cloaks; but first they shall both be beaten
with mallows. Finally, this fellow (to scaRABEE)





 

shall be turned over to the pitch-plasterers, so that
he may be murdered by having his hair pulled out,
and with filthy, nasty pitch, besides; then he shall
be taken to the summit of Haemus and left standing
there naked in the snow with his feet tied together.
 
 SCARABEE 
Ah, woe is me! Oh, oh! Alackaday!
FIRST SLAVE-OWNER
Why are you lugging in that quotation out of those
melodramatic discourses of yours? Come along with
me to the pitch-plasterers now; but first strip off
that lion skin, that you may be known for the ass
that you are.