Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the faith of God's elect, and the knowledge of the truth
which is according to godliness,

in hope of eternal life, which
God, who can't lie, promised before eternal times;

but in his own
time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted
according to the commandment of God our Savior;

to Titus, my true
child according to a common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.

I left you in Crete for this reason, that you would set in
order the things that were lacking, and appoint elders in every city,
as I directed you;

if anyone is blameless, the husband of one
wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or
unruly behavior.

For the overseer must be blameless, as God's
steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine, not
violent, not greedy for dishonest gain;

but given to hospitality,
as a lover of good, sober-minded, fair, holy, self-controlled;

holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching, that
he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict those
who contradict him.

For there are also many unruly men, vain
talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,

whose mouths must be stopped; men who overthrow whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for dishonest gain's sake.

One of
them, a prophet of their own, said, "Cretans are always liars, evil
beasts, and idle gluttons."

This testimony is true. For this
cause, reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,

not paying attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men
who turn away from the truth.

To the pure, all things are pure;
but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but both
their mind and their conscience are defiled.

They profess that
they know God, but by their works they deny him, being abominable,
disobedient, and unfit for any good work.

But say the things which fit sound doctrine,

that older
men should be temperate, sensible, sober-minded, sound in faith, in
love, and in patience:

and that older women likewise be reverent
in behavior, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that
which is good;

that they may train the young women to love their
husbands, to love their children,

to be sober-minded, chaste,
workers at home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that
God's word may not be blasphemed.

Likewise, exhort the younger
men to be sober-minded;

in all things showing yourself an example
of good works; in your teaching showing integrity, seriousness,
incorruptibility,

and soundness of speech that can't be
condemned; that he who opposes you may be ashamed, having no evil thing
to say about us.

Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own
masters, and to be well-pleasing in all things; not contradicting;

not stealing, but showing all good fidelity; that they may adorn
the doctrine of God, our Savior, in all things.

For the grace of
God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,

instructing us
to the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we would
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;

looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great
God and Savior, Jesus Christ;

who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify for himself a people for
his own possession, zealous for good works.

Say these things and
exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no man despise you.

Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to authorities,
to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,

to speak evil of
no one, not to be contentious, to be gentle, showing all humility
toward all men.

For we were also once foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

But when the kindness of
God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared,

not by works
of righteousness, which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy,
he saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the
Holy Spirit,

which he poured out on us richly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior;

that, being justified by his grace, we might
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

This saying
is faithful, and concerning these things I desire that you affirm
confidently, so that those who have believed God may be careful to
maintain good works. These things are good and profitable to men;

but shun foolish questionings, genealogies, strife, and disputes about
the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.

Avoid a factious
man after a first and second warning;

knowing that such a one is
perverted, and sins, being self-condemned.

When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, be diligent to come
to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined to winter there.

Send
Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey speedily, that nothing
may be lacking for them.

Let our people also learn to maintain
good works for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.

All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in
faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.