The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that Jesus
began both to do and to teach,

until the day in which he was
received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to
the apostles whom he had chosen.

To these he also showed himself
alive after his suffering by many proofs, appearing to them over a
period of forty days, and spoke about God's Kingdom.

Being
assembled together with them, he charged them, "Don't depart from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which you heard from
me.

For John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized
in the Holy Spirit not many days from now."

Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him, "Lord,
are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?"

He said to them, "It isn't for you to know times or seasons
which the Father has set within His own authority.

But you will
receive power when the Holy Spirit has come on you. You will be
witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the
uttermost parts of the earth."

When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

While
they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went, behold, two men
stood by them in white clothing,

who also said, "You men of
Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was
received up from you into the sky will come back in the same way as you
saw him going into the sky."

Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called
Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.

When they had come in, they went up into the upper room, where they
were staying; that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas,
Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and
Judas the son of James.

All these with one accord continued
steadfastly in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the
mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.

In these days, Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples
(and the number of names was about one hundred twenty), and said,

"Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture should be
fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David
concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus.

For he
was numbered with us, and received his portion in this ministry.

Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness, and
falling headlong, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed
out.

It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in
their language that field was called 'Akeldama,' that is, 'The field of
blood.'

For it is written in the book of Psalms,
'Let his habitation be made desolate,
 Let no one dwell therein,'

 and,
'Let another take his office.'

Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us,

beginning
from the baptism of John, to the day that he was received up from us,
of these one must become a witness with us of his resurrection."

They put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was
surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

They prayed, and said, "You,
Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you
have chosen

to take part in this ministry and apostleship from
which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place."

They
drew lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered
with the eleven apostles.

Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one
accord in one place.

Suddenly there came from the sky a sound
like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting.

Tongues like fire appeared and were
distributed to them, and it sat on each one of them.

They were
all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other
languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak.

Now
there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation
under the sky.

When this sound was heard, the multitude came
together, and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking in
his own language.

They were all amazed and marveled, saying to
one another, "Behold, aren't all these who speak Galileans?

How
do we hear, everyone in our own native language?

Parthians,
Medes, Elamites, and people from Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia,
Pontus, Asia,

Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya
around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,

Cretans and Arabians: we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty
works of God!"

They were all amazed, and were perplexed, saying
one to another, "What does this mean?"

Others, mocking, said,
"They are filled with new wine."

But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice,
and spoke out to them, "You men of Judea, and all you who dwell at
Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words.

For
these aren't drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is only the third hour
of the day.

But this is what has been spoken through the prophet
Joel:

'It will be in the last days, says God,
 I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh.
Your sons and your daughters will prophesy.
 Your young men will see visions.
 Your old men will dream dreams.

Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days,
 I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy.

I will show wonders in the the sky above,
 And signs on the earth beneath;
 Blood, and fire, and billows of smoke.

The sun will be turned into darkness,
 And the moon into blood,
 Before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.

It will be, that whoever will call on the name of the Lord
 will be saved.'

"You men of Israel, hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth, a
man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which
God did by him in the midst of you, even as you yourselves know,

him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of
God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed;

whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of death,
because it was not possible that he should be held by it.

For
David says concerning him,
'I saw the Lord always before my face,
 For he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.

Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced.
 Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope;

Because you will not leave my soul in Hades,
 Neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay.

You made known to me the ways of life.
 You will make me full of gladness with your presence.'

"Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David, that
he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.

Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh,
he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne,

he foreseeing
this spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was his
soul left in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay.

This Jesus God
raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.

Being therefore exalted
by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the
promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this, which you now see
and hear.

For David didn't ascend into the heavens, but he says
himself,
'The Lord said to my Lord, "Sit by my right hand,

Until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet."'

"Let all the house of Israel therefore know assuredly that
God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified."

Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and
said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, "Brothers, what shall we
do?"

Peter said to them, "Repent, and be baptized, everyone of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you
will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

For to you is the
promise, and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many
as the Lord our God will call to himself."

With many other words
he testified, and exhorted them, saying, "Save yourselves from this
crooked generation!"

Then those who gladly received his word were baptized. There
were added that day about three thousand souls.

They continued
steadfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking
of bread, and prayer.

Fear came on every soul, and many wonders
and signs were done through the apostles.

All who believed were
together, and had all things common.

They sold their possessions
and goods, and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need.

Day by day, continuing steadfastly with one accord in the
temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their food with gladness
and singleness of heart,

praising God, and having favor with all
the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were
being saved.

Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of
prayer, the ninth hour.

A certain man who was lame from his
mother's womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of
the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of
those who entered into the temple.

Seeing Peter and John about to
go into the temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy.

Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with John, said, "Look at us."

He listened to them, expecting to receive something from them.

But Peter said, "Silver and gold have I none, but what I have, that I
give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise and walk!"

He took him by the right hand, and raised him up. Immediately his
feet and his ankle bones received strength.

Leaping up, he stood,
and began to walk. He entered with them into the temple, walking,
leaping, and praising God.

All the people saw him walking and
praising God.

They recognized him, that it was he who sat
begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple.
They were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened
to him.

As the lame man who was healed held Peter and John, all
the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's,
greatly wondering.

When Peter saw it, he answered to the people, "You men of
Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on
us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk?

The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers,
has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up, and denied
before the face of Pilate, when he had determined to release him.

But you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked for a
murderer to be granted to you,

and killed the Prince of life,
whom God raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.

By
faith in his name has his name made this man strong, whom you see and
know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him this perfect
soundness in the presence of you all.

"Now, brothers, I know that you did this in ignorance, as did
also your rulers.

But the things which God announced by the
mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.

"Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be
blotted out, that so there may come times of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord,

and that he may send Christ Jesus, who was
ordained for you before,

whom the heaven must receive until the
times of restoration of all things, whereof God spoke by the mouth of
his holy prophets that have been from ancient times.

For Moses
indeed said to the fathers, 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet to
you from among your brothers, like me. You shall listen to him in all
things whatever he says to you.

It will be, that every soul that
will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among
the people.'

Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and those who
followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of these days.

You are the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant which God
made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, 'In your seed will all the
families of the earth be blessed.'

God, having raised up his
servant, Jesus, sent him to you first, to bless you, in turning away
everyone of you from your wickedness."

As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of
the temple and the Sadducees came to them,

being upset because
they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from
the dead.

They laid hands on them, and put them in custody until
the next day, for it was now evening.

But many of those who heard
the word believed, and the number of the men came to be about five
thousand.

It happened in the morning, that their rulers, elders, and
scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem.

Annas the high
priest was there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were
relatives of the high priest.

When they had stood them in the
midst, they inquired, "By what power, or in what name, have you done
this?"

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, "You
rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,

if we are examined
today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this
man has been healed,

be it known to you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom
you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, in him does this man
stand here before you whole.

He is 'the stone which was regarded
as worthless by you, the builders, which was made the head of the
corner.'

There is salvation in none other, for neither is there
any other name under heaven, that is given among men, in which we must
be saved!"

Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled.
They recognized that they had been with Jesus.

Seeing the man
who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.

But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council,
they conferred among themselves,

saying, "What shall we do to
these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them,
as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can't deny
it.

But so that this spreads no further among the people, let's
threaten them, that from now on they don't speak to anyone in this
name."

They called them, and charged them not to speak at all
nor teach in the name of Jesus.

But Peter and John answered them, "Whether it is right in the
sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves,

for we can't help telling the things which we saw and heard."

They, when they had further threatened them, let them go,
finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone
glorified God for that which was done.

For the man was more than
forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was performed.

Being let go, they came to their own company, and reported
all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.

They, when they heard it, lifted up their voice to God with one accord,
and said, "O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the earth, the
sea, and all that is in them;

who by the mouth of your servant,
David, said,
'Why do the nations rage,
 And the peoples plot a vain thing?

The kings of the earth take a stand,
 And the rulers take council together,
 Against the Lord, and against his Christ.'

For truly, in this city against your holy servant, Jesus,
whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
the people of Israel, were gathered together

to do whatever your
hand and your council foreordained to happen.

Now, Lord, look at
their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all
boldness,

while you stretch out your hand to heal; and that
signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant
Jesus."

When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they
spoke the word of God with boldness.

The multitude of those who
believed were of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that
anything of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all
things common.

With great power, the apostles gave their
testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on
them all.

For neither was there among them any who lacked, for
as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the
prices of the things that were sold,

and laid them at the
apostles' feet, and distribution was made to each, according as anyone
had need.

Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas
(which is, being interpreted, Son of Exhortation), a Levite, a man of
Cyprus by race,

having a field, sold it, and brought the money
and laid it at the apostles' feet.

But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira, his wife, sold
a possession,

and kept back part of the price, his wife also
being aware of it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the
apostles' feet.

But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan filled
your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the
price of the land?

While you kept it, didn't it remain your own?
After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it that you have
conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to men, but to
God."

Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great fear
came on all who heard these things.

The young men arose and
wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him.

About
three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.

Peter answered her, "Tell me whether you sold the land for so
much."

 She said, "Yes, for so much."

But Peter asked her, "How is it that you have agreed together
to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have
buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out."

She fell down immediately at his feet, and died. The young
men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her
by her husband.

Great fear came on the whole assembly, and on
all who heard these things.

By the hands of the apostles many
signs and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one
accord in Solomon's porch.

None of the rest dared to join them,
however the people honored them.

More believers were added to
the Lord, multitudes of both men and women.

They even carried
out the sick into the streets, and laid them on cots and mattresses, so
that as Peter came by, at the least his shadow might overshadow some of
them.

Multitudes also came together from the cities around
Jerusalem, bringing sick people, and those who were tormented by
unclean spirits: and they were all healed.

But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with him
(which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with
jealousy,

and laid hands on the apostles, and put them in public
custody.

But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by
night, and brought them out, and said,

"Go stand and speak in
the temple to the people all the words of this life."

When they heard this, they entered into the temple about
daybreak, and taught. But the high priest came, and those who were with
him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the
children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.

But the officers who came didn't find them in the prison. They returned
and reported,

"We found the prison shut and locked, and the
guards standing before the doors, but when we had opened it up, we
found no one inside!"

Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the
chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them
and what might become of this.

One came and told them, "Behold,
the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching
the people."

Then the captain went with the officers, and
brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people
might stone them.

When they had brought them, they set them before the council.
The high priest questioned them,

saying, "Didn't we strictly
charge you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem
with your teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood on us."

But Peter and the apostles answered, "We must obey God rather
than men.

The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you
killed, hanging him on a tree.

God exalted him with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and
remission of sins.

We are His witnesses of these things; and so
also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him."

But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and
determined to kill them.

But one stood up in the council, a
Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the
people, and commanded to take the apostles out a little while.

He said to them, "You men of Israel, be careful concerning these men,
what you are about to do.

For before these days Theudas rose up,
making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed, and came to nothing.

After this man, Judas
of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some
people after him. He also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him,
were scattered abroad.

Now I tell you, refrain from these men,
and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it
will be overthrown.

But if it is of God, you will not be able to
overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against God!"

They agreed with him. Summoning the apostles, they beat them
and charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.

They therefore departed from the presence of the council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus'
name.

Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped
teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.

Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was
multiplying, there arose a grumbling of the Grecian Jews against the
Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily service.

The twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, "It is not
appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables.

Therefore select from among you, brothers, seven men of good report,
full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business.

But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the
ministry of the word."

These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose Stephen, a
man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor,
Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch;

whom they
set before the apostles. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on
them.

The word of God increased and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly. A great company of the priests
were obedient to the faith.

Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders and
signs among the people.

But some of those who were of the
synagogue called "The Libertines," and of the Cyrenians, of the
Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with
Stephen.

They weren't able to withstand the wisdom and the
Spirit by which he spoke.

Then they secretly induced men who
said, "We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
God."

They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes,
and came on him and seized him, and brought him in to the council,

and set up false witnesses who said, "This man never stops
speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law.

For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this
place, and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us."

All who sat in the council, fastening their eyes on him, saw his face
like it was the face of an angel.

The high priest said, "Are these things so?"

He said, "Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory
appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he
lived in Haran,

and said to him, 'Get out of your land, and from
your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.'

Then
he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and lived in Haran. From
there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land, where
you are now living.

He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so
much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him in
possession, and to his seed after him, when he still had no child.

God spoke in this way: that his seed would live as aliens in a
strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four
hundred years.

'I will judge the nation to which they will be in
bondage,' said God, 'and after that will they come out, and serve me in
this place.'

He gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham
became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac
became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve
patriarchs.

"The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold him
into Egypt. God was with him,

and delivered him out of all his
afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of
Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house.

Now a
famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great
affliction. Our fathers found no food.

But when Jacob heard that
there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the first time.

On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and
Joseph's race was revealed to Pharaoh.

Joseph sent, and summoned
Jacob, his father, and all his relatives, seventy-five souls.

Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died, himself and our fathers,

and they were brought back to Shechem, and laid in the tomb that
Abraham bought for a price in silver from the sons of Hamor of Shechem.

"But as the time of the promise came close which God swore to
Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,

until there
arose a different king, who didn't know Joseph.

The same dealt
slyly with our race, and mistreated our fathers, that they should throw
out their babies, so that they wouldn't stay alive.

At that time
Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome. He was nourished three
months in his father's house.

When he was thrown out, Pharaoh's
daughter took him up, and reared him as her own son.

Moses was
instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his
words and works.

But when he was forty years old, it came into
his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel.

Seeing
one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him who was
oppressed, striking the Egyptian.

He supposed that his brothers
understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they
didn't understand.

"The day following, he appeared to them as they fought, and
urged them to be at peace again, saying, 'Sirs, you are brothers. Why
do you wrong one to another?'

But he who did his neighbor wrong
pushed him away, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?

Do you want to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?'

Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of
Midian, where he became the father of two sons.

"When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord
appeared to him in the wilderness of
 Mount Sinai 
 , in a flame of fire in
a bush.

When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he came
close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him,

'I am the God of
your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.' Moses trembled, and dared not look.

The Lord said to
him, 'Take your sandals off of your feet, for the place where you stand
is holy ground.

I have surely seen the affliction of my people
that is in
 Egypt 
 , and have heard their groaning. I have come down to
deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.'

"This Moses, whom they refused, saying, 'Who made you a ruler
and a judge?' -- God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer with
the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.

This man
led them out, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea,
and in the wilderness forty years.

This is that Moses, who said
to the children of
 Israel 
 , 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet to you
from among your brothers, like me.'

This is he who was in the
assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount
Sinai, and with our fathers, who received living oracles to give to us,

to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient, but rejected him, and
turned back in their hearts to
 Egypt 
 ,

saying to Aaron, 'Make us
gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses, who led us out of
the land of
 Egypt 
 , we don't know what has become of him.'

They
made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and
rejoiced in the works of their hands.

But God turned, and gave
them up to serve the host of the sky, as it is written in the book of
the prophets,
'Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices
 Forty years in the wilderness, O house of
 Israel 
 ?

You took up the tent of Moloch,
 The star of your god Rephan,
The figures which you made to worship.
 I will carry you away beyond Babylon.'

"Our fathers had the tent of the testimony in the wilderness,
even as he who spoke to Moses appointed, that he should make it
according to the pattern that he had seen;

which also our
fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into
the possession of the nations, whom God drove out before the face of
our fathers, to the days of David,

who found favor in the sight
of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.

But
Solomon built him a house.

However, the Most High doesn't dwell
in temples made with hands, as the prophet says,

'heaven is my throne,
 And the earth the footstool of my feet.
What kind of house will you build me?' says the Lord;
 'Or what is the place of my rest?

Didn't my hand make all these things?'

"You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you
always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do.

Which of the prophets didn't your fathers persecute? They killed those
who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now
become betrayers and murderers.

You received the law as it was
ordained by angels, and didn't keep it!"

Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart,
and they gnashed at him with their teeth.

But he, being full of
the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,

and said,
"Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the
right hand of God!"

But they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and rushed at him with one accord.

They threw him out of the
city, and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet
of a young man named Saul.

They stoned Stephen as he called out,
saying, "Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit!"

He kneeled down, and
cried with a loud voice, "Lord, don't hold this sin against them!" When
he had said this, he fell asleep.

Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose
against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all
scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except
for the apostles.

Devout men buried Stephen, and lamented greatly
over him.

But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into every
house, and dragged both men and women off to prison.

Therefore
those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word.

Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and proclaimed to them the
Christ.

The multitudes listened with one accord to the things
that were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs which he
did.

For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them.
They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who had been paralyzed
and lame were healed.

There was great joy in that city.

But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who had used
sorcery in the city before, and amazed the people of Samaria, making
himself out to be some great one,

to whom they all listened,
from the least to the greatest, saying, "This man is that great power
of God."

They listened to him, because for a long time he had
amazed them with his sorceries.

But when they believed Philip
preaching good news concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.

Simon himself
also believed. Being baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs
and great miracles done, he was amazed.

Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that
Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,

who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might
receive the Holy Spirit;

for as yet he had fallen on none of
them. They had only been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.

Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Spirit.

Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given
through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them money,

saying, "Give me also this power, that whoever I lay my hands on
may receive the Holy Spirit."

But Peter said to him, "May your
silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift
of God with money!

You have neither part nor lot in this matter,
for your heart isn't right before God.

Repent therefore of this,
your wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may
be forgiven you.

For I see that you are in the gall of
bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity."

Simon answered, "Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the
things which you have spoken come on me."

They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word
of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel to many
villages of the Samaritans.

But an angel of the Lord spoke to
Philip, saying, "Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes
down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert."

He arose and went. Behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a
eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who
was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.

He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the
prophet Isaiah.

The Spirit said to Philip, "Go near, and join yourself to
this chariot."

Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet,
and said, "Do you understand what you are reading?"

He said, "How can I, unless someone explains it to me?" He
begged Philip to come up and sit with him.

Now the passage of
the Scripture which he was reading was this,
"He was led as a sheep to the slaughter.
 As a lamb before his shearer is silent,
 So he doesn't open his mouth.

In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away.
 Who will declare His generations?
 For his life is taken from the earth."

The eunuch answered Philip, "Please tell who the prophet is
talking about: about himself, or about some other?"

Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture,
preached to him Jesus.

As they went on the way, they came to
some water, and the eunuch said, "Behold, here is water. What is
keeping me from being baptized?"



He commanded the chariot to stand still, and they
both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he
baptized him.

When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any more, for he went
on his way rejoicing.

But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing
through, he preached the gospel to all the cities, until he came to
Caesarea.

But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,

and asked for
letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any
who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem.

As he traveled, it happened that he got close to
Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him.

He
fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why do
you persecute me?"

He said, "Who are you, Lord?"

 The Lord said, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.

But rise
up, and enter into the city, and you will be told what you must do."

The men who traveled with him stood speechless, hearing the
voice, but seeing no one.

Saul arose from the ground, and when
his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand, and
brought him into Damascus.

He was without sight for three days,
and neither ate nor drank.

Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias.
The Lord said to him in a vision, "Ananias!"

 He said, "Behold, it's me, Lord."

The Lord said to him, "Arise, and go to the street which is
called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one named Saul,
a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying,

and in a vision he
has seen a man named Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him,
that he might receive his sight."

But Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard from many about
this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem.

Here
he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your
name."

But the Lord said to him, "Go your way, for he is my chosen
vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the children
of Israel.

For I will show him how many things he must suffer
for my name's sake."

Ananias departed, and entered into the house. Laying his
hands on him, he said, "Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you in
the way which you came, has sent me, that you may receive your sight,
and be filled with the Holy Spirit."

Immediately something like
scales fell from his eyes, and he received his sight. He arose and was
baptized.

He took food and was strengthened. Saul stayed several
days with the disciples who were at Damascus.

Immediately in the
synagogues he proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God.

All who heard him were amazed, and said, "Isn't this he who in
Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name? And he had come
here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests!"

But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the Jews
who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.

When
many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together to kill him,

but their plot became known to Saul. They watched the gates both
day and night that they might kill him,

but his disciples took
him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a
basket.

When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join
himself to the disciples. They were all afraid of him, not believing
that he was a disciple.

But Barnabas took him, and brought him
to the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the
way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached
boldly in the name of Jesus.

He was with them going in and going
out at Jerusalem,

preaching boldly in the name of the Lord. He
spoke and disputed against the Grecian Jews, but they were seeking to
kill him.

When the brothers knew it, they brought him down to
Caesarea, and sent him out to Tarsus.

So the assemblies
throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, and were built
up. They were multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the
comfort of the Holy Spirit.

It happened, as Peter went throughout all those parts, he
came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda.

There he found
a certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years,
because he was paralyzed.

Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus
Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!" Immediately he arose.

All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they turned to
the Lord.

Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha,
which when translated, means Dorcas. This woman was full of good works
and acts of mercy which she did.

It happened in those days that
she fell sick, and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an
upper chamber.

As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing
that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him not to delay
in coming to them.

Peter got up and went with them. When he had
come, they brought him into the upper chamber. All the widows stood by
him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while
she was with them.

Peter put them all out, and kneeled down and
prayed. Turning to the body, he said, "Tabitha, get up!" She opened her
eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

He gave her his hand,
and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her
alive.

It became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed
in the Lord.

It happened, that he stayed many days in Joppa with
one Simon, a tanner.

Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a
centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment,

a devout man,
and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts for the needy
generously to the people, and always prayed to God.

At about the
ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God
coming to him, and saying to him, "Cornelius!"

He, fastening his eyes on him, and being frightened, said,
"What is it, Lord?"

 He said to him, "Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone
up for a memorial before God.

Now send men to Joppa, and get
Simon, who is surnamed Peter.

He lodges with one Simon, a
tanner, whose house is by the seaside."

When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius
called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who
waited on him continually.

Having explained everything to them,
he sent them to Joppa.

Now on the next day as they were on their
journey, and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to
pray at about noon.

He became hungry and desired to eat, but
while they were preparing, he fell into a trance.

He saw heaven
opened and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet
let down by four corners on the earth,

in which were all kinds
of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds
of the sky.

A voice came to him, "Rise, Peter, kill and eat!"

But Peter said, "Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten
anything that is common or unclean."

A voice came to him again the second time, "What God has
cleansed, you must not make unholy."

This was done three times,
and immediately the vessel was received up into heaven.

Now
while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had
seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having
made inquiry for Simon's house, stood before the gate,

and
called and asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, was lodging
there.

While Peter thought about the vision, the Spirit said to
him, "Behold, three men seek you.

But arise, get down, and go
with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent them."

Peter went down to the men, and said, "Behold, I am he whom
you seek. Why have you come?"

They said, "Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one
who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was
directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to
what you say.

So he called them in and lodged them. On the next
day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brothers from
Joppa accompanied him.

On the next day they entered into
Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his
relatives and his near friends.

When it happened that Peter
entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him.

But Peter raised him up, saying, "Stand up! I myself am also a
man."

As he talked with him, he went in and found many gathered
together.

He said to them, "You yourselves know how it is an
unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of
another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't call any man
unholy or unclean.

Therefore also I came without complaint when
I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?"

Cornelius said, "Four days ago, I was fasting until this
hour, and at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house, and behold, a man
stood before me in bright clothing,

and said, 'Cornelius, your
prayer is heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the
sight of God.

Send therefore to Joppa, and summon Simon, who is
surnamed Peter. He lodges in the house of Simon a tanner, by the
seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.'

Therefore I sent
to you at once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are
all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been
commanded you by God."

Peter opened his mouth and said, "Truly I perceive that God
doesn't show favoritism;

but in every nation he who fears him
and works righteousness is acceptable to him.

The word which he
sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus
Christ -- he is Lord of all --

that spoken word you yourselves
know, which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from
Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;

even Jesus of
Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who
went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil,
for God was with him.

We are witnesses of all things which he
did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they also
killed, hanging him on a tree.

God raised him up the third day,
and gave him to be revealed,

not to all the people, but to
witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with
him after he rose from the dead.

He charged us to preach to the
people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the
Judge of the living and the dead.

All the prophets testify
about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him will
receive remission of sins."

While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit
fell on all those who heard the word.

They of the circumcision
who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift
of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.

For
they heard them speak with other languages and magnify God.

 Then Peter answered,

"Can any man forbid the water, that
these who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we should not be
baptized?"

He commanded them to be baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.

Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard
that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.

When Peter
had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision contended
with him,

saying, "You went in to uncircumcised men, and ate
with them!"

But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying,

"I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a
vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let
down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me,

on
which, when I had looked intently, I considered, and saw the
four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and
birds of the sky.

I also heard a voice saying to me, 'Rise,
Peter, kill and eat!'

But I said, 'Not so, Lord, for nothing
unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.'

But a voice
answered me the second time out of heaven, 'What God has cleansed,
don't you make unholy.'

This was done three times, and all were
drawn up again into heaven.

Behold, immediately three men stood
before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me.

The Spirit told me to go with them, without discriminating.
These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered into the man's
house.

He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his
house, and saying to him, 'Send to Joppa, and get Simon, whose surname
is Peter,

who will speak to you words by which you will be
saved, you and all your house.'

As I began to speak, the Holy
Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.

I
remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, 'John indeed baptized in
water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.'

If then
God gave to them the same gift as us, when we believed in the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?"

When they heard these things, they held their peace, and
glorified God, saying, "Then God has also granted to the Gentiles
repentance to life!"

They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression
that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and
Antioch, speaking the word to no one except only to Jews.

But
there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had
come to Antioch, spoke to the Greeks, preaching the Lord Jesus.

The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and
turned to the Lord.

The report concerning them came to the ears
of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent out Barnabas to go as
far as Antioch,

who, when he had come, and had seen the grace
of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they
would remain near to the Lord.

For he was a good man, and full
of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord.

Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul.

When
he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. It happened, that even for
a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught
many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.

Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch.

One of them named Agabus stood up, and indicated by
the Spirit that there should be a great famine over all the world,
which also happened in the days of Claudius.

The disciples, as
anyone had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who
lived in Judea;

which they also did, sending it to the elders
by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

Now about that time, Herod the king stretched out his hands
to oppress some of the assembly.

He killed James, the brother of
John, with the sword.

When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened
bread.

When he had captured him, he put him in prison, and
delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him,
intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.

Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by
the assembly to God for him.

The same night when Herod was about
to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with
two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison.

Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone
in the cell. He struck Peter on the side, and woke him up, saying,
"Stand up quickly!" His chains fell off from his hands.

The
angel said to him, "Put on your clothes, and tie on your sandals." He
did so. He said to him, "Put on your cloak, and follow me."

He
went out, and followed him. He didn't know that what was done by the
angel was real, but thought he saw a vision.

When they were
past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that
leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out, and
passed on through one street, and immediately the angel departed from
him.

When Peter had come to himself, he said, "Now I truly know
that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand
of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting."

Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the mother
of John whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together and
were praying.

When Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a
maid named Rhoda came to answer.

When she recognized Peter's
voice, she didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in, and reported that
Peter stood before the gate.

They said to her, "You are crazy!" But she insisted that it
was so. They said, "It is his angel."

But Peter continued
knocking. When they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.

But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, declared to them
how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, "Tell these
things to James, and to the brothers." He departed, and went to another
place.

Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the
soldiers about what had become of Peter.

When Herod had sought
for him, and didn't find him, he examined the guards, and commanded
that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea,
and stayed there.

Now Herod was highly displeased with those of
Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him, and, having made
Blastus, the king's chamberlain, their friend, they asked for peace,
because their country depended on the king's country for food.

On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on
the throne, and gave a speech to them.

The people shouted, "The
voice of a god, and not of a man!"

Immediately an angel of the
Lord struck him, because he didn't give God the glory, and he was eaten
by worms, and he died.

But the word of God grew and multiplied.

Barnabas
and Saul returned to Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their service,
also taking with them John whose surname was Mark.

Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some
prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of
Cyrene, Manaen the foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said,
"Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called
them."

Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away.

So, being sent out by the Holy
Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus.

When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in
the synagogues of the Jews. They had also John as their attendant.

When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found a
certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar Jesus,

who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of
understanding. The same summoned Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear
the word of God.

But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by
interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the proconsul
from the faith.

But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with
the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him,

and said, "Full of
all deceit and all cunning, you son of the devil, you enemy of all
righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the
Lord?

Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will
be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!"

 Immediately there fell on him a mist and darkness. He went around
seeking someone to lead him by the hand.

Then the proconsul,
when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching
of the Lord.

Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos, and came to
Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem.

But they, passing through from Perga, came to Antioch of
Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down.

After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of
the synagogue sent to them, saying, "Brothers, if you have any word of
exhortation for the people, speak."

Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, "Men of
Israel, and you who fear God, listen.

The God of this people
Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as
aliens in the land of
 Egypt 
 , and with an uplifted arm, he led them out
of it.

For about the time of forty years he put up with them in
the wilderness.

When he had destroyed seven nations in the land
of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance, for about four
hundred fifty years.

After these things he gave them judges
until Samuel the prophet.

Afterward they asked for a king, and
God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin,
for forty years.

When he had removed him, he raised up David to
be their king, to whom he also testified, 'I have found David the son
of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.'

From
this man's seed, God has brought salvation to Israel according to his
promise,

before his coming, when John had first preached the
baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.

As John was
fulfilling his course, he said, 'What do you suppose that I am? I am
not he. But behold, one comes after me the sandals of whose feet I am
not worthy to untie.'

Brothers, children of the stock of
Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation
is sent out to you.

For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their
rulers, because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the prophets
which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.

Though they found no cause for death, they still asked Pilate to have
him killed.

When they had fulfilled all things that were
written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a
tomb.

But God raised him from the dead,

and he was seen
for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem,
who are his witnesses to the people.

We bring you good news of
the promise made to the fathers,

that God has fulfilled the
same to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also
written in the second psalm,
'You are my Son.
 Today I have become your father.'

"Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more
to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: 'I will give you the holy
and sure blessings of David.'

Therefore he says also in another
psalm, 'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.'

For
David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God,
fell asleep, and was laid with his fathers, and saw decay.

But
he whom God raised up saw no decay.

Be it known to you
therefore, brothers, that through this man is proclaimed to you
remission of sins,

and by him everyone who believes is
justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is
spoken in the prophets:

'Behold, you scoffers, and wonder, and perish;
 For I work a work in your days,
 A work which you will in no way believe, if one declares it to you.'"

So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles
begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath.

Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the
devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them,
urged them to continue in the grace of God.

The next Sabbath
almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God.

But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
jealousy, and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul, and
blasphemed.

Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, "It was
necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed
you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life,
behold, we turn to the Gentiles.

For so has the Lord commanded
us, saying,
'I have set you as a light of the Gentiles,
 That you should be for salvation to the uttermost parts of the
 earth.'"

As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified
the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed.

The Lord's word was spread abroad throughout all the region.

But the Jews urged on the devout women of honorable estate, and
the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul
and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders.

But they
shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium.

The disciples were filled with joy with the Holy Spirit.

It happened in Iconium that they entered together into the
synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews
and of Greeks believed.

But the disobedient Jews stirred up and
embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers.

Therefore they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord,
who testified to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to
be done by their hands.

But the multitude of the city was
divided. Part sided with the Jews, and part with the apostles.

When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a
violent attempt to insult them and to stone them,

they became
aware of it, and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the
surrounding region.

There they preached the gospel.

At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a cripple
from his mother's womb, who never had walked.

He was listening
to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him, and seeing that he had
faith to be made whole,

said with a loud voice, "Stand upright
on your feet!" He leaped up and walked.

When the multitude saw
what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language
of Lycaonia, "The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!"

They called Barnabas "Jupiter," and Paul "Mercury," because he
was the chief speaker.

The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was
in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and
would have made a sacrifice with the multitudes.

But when the
apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes, and
sprang into the multitude, crying out,

"Men, why are you doing
these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you
good news, that you should turn from these vain things to the living
God, who made the sky and the earth and the sea, and all that is in
them;

who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to
walk in their own ways.

Yet he didn't leave himself without
witness, in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness."

Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the multitudes
from making a sacrifice to them.

But some Jews from Antioch and
Iconium came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned
Paul, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.

But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and
entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to
Derbe.

When they had preached the gospel to that city, and had
made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,

confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to
continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter
into the Kingdom of God.

When they had appointed elders for
them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended
them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.

They passed through Pisidia, and came to Pamphylia.

When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.

From there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been
committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled.

When they had arrived, and had gathered the assembly together,
they reported all the things that God had done with them, and that he
had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.

They stayed there
with the disciples for a long time.

Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers,
"Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you can't be
saved."

Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord
and discussion with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and some
others of them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about
this question.

They, being sent on their way by the assembly,
passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of
the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers.

When
they had come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly and the
apostles and the elders, and they reported all things that God had done
with them.

But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up,
saying, "It is necessary to circumcise them, and to charge them to keep
the law of Moses."

The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see
about this matter.

When there had been much discussion, Peter
rose up and said to them, "Brothers, you know that a good while ago God
made choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe.

God, who knows the heart,
testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to
us.

He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their
hearts by faith.

Now therefore why do you tempt God, that you
should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our
fathers nor we were able to bear?

But we believe that we are
saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are."

All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to
Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among
the Gentiles through them.

After they were silent, James
answered, "Brothers, listen to me.

Simeon has reported how God
first visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.

This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is written,

'After these things I will return.
 I will again build the tent of David, which has fallen.
 I will again build its ruins.
I will set it up,

That the rest of men may seek after the Lord;
 All the Gentiles who are called by my name,
Says the Lord, who does all these things.

All his works are known to God from eternity.'

"Therefore my judgment is that we don't trouble those from
among the Gentiles who turn to God,

but that we write to them
that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality,
from what is strangled, and from blood.

For Moses from
generations of old has in every city those who preach him, being read
in the synagogues every Sabbath."

Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the
whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas,
chief men among the brothers.

They wrote these things by their
hand:

 "The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are
of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings.

Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you
with words, unsettling your souls, saying, 'You must be circumcised and
keep the law,' to whom we gave no commandment;

it seemed good
to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them to
you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,

men who have risked
their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We have sent
therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell you the same
things by word of mouth.

For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit,
and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things:

that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood,
from things strangled, and from sexual immorality, from which if you
keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell."

So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having
gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.

When they had read it, they rejoiced for the consolation.

Judas
and Silas, also being prophets themselves, encouraged the brothers with
many words, and strengthened them.

After they had spent some
time there, they were sent back with greetings from the brothers to the
apostles.



But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch,
teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.

After some days Paul said to Barnabas, "Let's return now and
visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the
Lord, to see how they are doing."

Barnabas planned to take John
with them also, who was called Mark.

But Paul didn't think that
it was a good idea to take with them someone who withdrew from them
from Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the work.

Then
there arose a sharp contention, so that they separated from each other.
Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed away to Cyprus,

but
Paul chose Silas, and went out, being commended by the brothers to the
grace of God.

He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening
the assemblies.

He came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple
was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed; but his
father was a Greek.

The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium
gave a good testimony about him.

Paul wanted to have him go out
with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were
in those parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.

As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered the
decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and
elders who were at Jerusalem.

So the assemblies were
strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily.

When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia,
they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia.

When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go into
Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them.

Passing by Mysia,
they came down to Troas.

A vision appeared to Paul in the night.
There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him, and saying, "Come
over into Macedonia and help us."

When he had seen the vision,
immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord
had called us to preach the gospel to them.

Setting sail
therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the
day following to Neapolis;

and from there to Philippi, which is
a city of Macedonia, the first of the district, a Roman colony. We were
staying some days in this city.

On the Sabbath day we went forth outside of the city by a
riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat
down, and spoke to the women who had come together.

A certain
woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who
worshiped God, heard us; whose heart the Lord opened to listen to the
things which were spoken by Paul.

When she and her household
were baptized, she begged us, saying, "If you have judged me to be
faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and stay." She urged us.

It happened, as we were going to prayer, that a certain girl
having a spirit of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain
by fortune telling.

The same, following after Paul and us,
cried out, "These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim
to us the way of salvation!"

This she did for many days.

 But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit,
"I charge you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!" It came
out that very hour.

But when her masters saw that the hope of
their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, and dragged them into
the marketplace before the rulers.

When they had brought them
to the magistrates, they said, "These men, being Jews, are agitating
our city,

and set forth customs which it is not lawful for us
to accept or to observe, being Romans."

The multitude rose up together against them, and the
magistrates tore their clothes off of them, and commanded them to be
beaten with rods.

When they had laid many stripes on them, they
threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely,

who, having received such a charge, threw them into the inner
prison, and secured their feet in the stocks.

But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing
hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.

Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the
prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and
everyone's bonds were loosened.

The jailer, being roused out of
sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to
kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.

But
Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, "Don't harm yourself, for we are
all here!"

He called for lights and sprang in, and, fell down trembling
before Paul and Silas,

and brought them out and said, "Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?"

They said, "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will
be saved, you and your household."

They spoke the word of the
Lord to him, and to all who were in his house.

He took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and all his household.

He brought them up into his house, and set food before them,
and rejoiced greatly, with all his household, having believed in God.

But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants,
saying, "Let those men go."

The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, "The
magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out, and go in
peace."

But Paul said to them, "They have beaten us publicly,
without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do
they now release us secretly? No, most assuredly, but let them come
themselves and bring us out!"

The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and
they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans,

and
they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they asked
them to depart from the city.

They went out of the prison, and
entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers, they
comforted them, and departed.

Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia,
they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.

Paul, as was his custom, went in to them, and for three Sabbath
days reasoned with them from the Scriptures,

explaining and
demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer, and to rise again from the
dead, and saying, "This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ."

Some of them were persuaded, and joined Paul and Silas, of
the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women.

But the disobedient Jews gathered some wicked men from the
marketplace, and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar.
Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the
people.

When they didn't find them, they dragged Jason and
certain brothers before the rulers of the city, crying, "These who have
turned the world upside down have come here also,

whom Jason has
received. These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that
there is another king, Jesus!"

The multitude and the rulers of
the city were troubled when they heard these things.

When they
had taken security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.

The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea.
When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.

Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in
that they received the word with all readiness of the mind, examining
the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.

Many of
them therefore believed; also of the Greek women of honorable estate,
and not a few men.

But when the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also,
they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes.

Then the
brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea, and
Silas and Timothy still stayed there.

But those who escorted
Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and
Timothy that they should come to him with all speed, they departed.

Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was
provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols.

So he
reasoned in the synagogue with Jews and the devout persons, and in the
marketplace every day with those who met him.

Some of the
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also encountered him. Some said, "What
does this babbler want to say?"

 Others said, "He seems to be advocating foreign demons," because he
preached Jesus and the resurrection.

They took hold of him, and brought him to the Areopagus,
saying, "May we know what this new teaching is, which is spoken by you?

For you bring certain strange things to our ears. We want to
know therefore what these things mean."

Now all the Athenians
and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else, but
either to tell or to hear some new thing.

Paul stood in the midst of the Areopagus, and said, "You men
of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things.

For as I passed along, and observed the objects of your
worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: 'TO AN UNKNOWN
GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I announce to you.

The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord
of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands,

neither is he served by men's hands, as though he needed anything,
seeing he himself gives to all life and breath, and all things.

He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface
of the earth, having determined appointed seasons, and the bounds of
their habitation,

that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps
they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from
each one of us.

'For in him we live, and move, and have our
being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his
offspring.'

Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone,
engraved by art and device of man.

The times of ignorance
therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all men everywhere
should repent,

because he has appointed a day in which he will
judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained;
whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him
from the dead."

Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked; but others said, "We want to hear you yet again concerning
this."

Thus Paul went out from among them.

But certain men
joined with him, and believed, among whom also was Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to
Corinth.

He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by
race, who had recently come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla,
because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome. He
came to them,

and because he practiced the same trade, he lived
with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers.

He
reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.

But when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was
compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the
Christ.

When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his
clothing and said to them, "Your blood be on your own heads! I am
clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!"

He departed there, and went into the house of a certain man
named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the
synagogue.

Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the
Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed and
were baptized.

The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision,
"Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent;

for I am with
you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in
this city."

He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of
God among them.

But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the
Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the
judgment seat,

saying, "This man persuades men to worship God
contrary to the law."

But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to
the Jews, "If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime,
Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you;

but
if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look to
it yourselves. For I don't want to be a judge of these matters."

He drove them from the judgment seat.

Then all the Greeks laid hold on Sosthenes, the ruler of the
synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. Gallio didn't care
about any of these things.

Paul, having stayed after this yet many days, took his leave
of the brothers, and sailed from there for Syria, with Priscilla and
Aquila with him. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow.

He came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself
entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.

When
they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined;

but taking his leave of them, and saying, "I must by all means keep
this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return again to you if God
wills," he set sail from Ephesus.

When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the
assembly, and went down to Antioch.

Having spent some time
there, he departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and
Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples.

Now a
certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man,
came to Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures.

This man had
been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he
spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he
knew only the baptism of John.

He began to speak boldly in the
synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him
aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately.

When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the
brothers encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him.
When he had come, he helped them much, who had believed through grace;

for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

It happened that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having
passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus, and found certain
disciples.

He said to them, "Did you receive the Holy Spirit
when you believed?"

 They said to him, "No, we haven't even heard that there is a Holy
Spirit."

He said, "Into what then were you baptized?"

 They said, "Into John's baptism."

Paul said, "John indeed baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one
who would come after him, that is, on Jesus."

When they heard this, they were baptized into the name of the
Lord Jesus.

When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy
Spirit came on them, and they spoke with other languages, and
prophesied.

They were about twelve men in all.

He entered
into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for a period of three months,
reasoning and persuading about the things concerning the Kingdom of God.

But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of
the Way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the
disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus.

This
continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the
word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul,

so
that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to
the sick, and the evil spirits went out.

But some of the
itinerant Jews, exorcists, took on themselves to name over those who
had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, "We adjure you
by Jesus whom Paul preaches."

There were seven sons of one
Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this.

The evil spirit answered, "Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but who are you?"

The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on
them, and overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they
fled out of that house naked and wounded.

This became known to
all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all,
and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

Many also of
those who had believed came, confessing, and declaring their deeds.

Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books
together and burned them in the sight of all. They counted the price of
them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.

So the word
of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty.

Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the
spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to
Jerusalem, saying, "After I have been there, I must also see Rome."

Having sent into Macedonia two of those who ministered to
him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.

About that time there arose no small stir concerning the Way.

For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made
silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen,

whom he gathered together, with the workmen of like occupation,
and said, "Sirs, you know that by this business we have our wealth.

You see and hear, that not at Ephesus alone, but almost
throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many
people, saying that they are no gods, that are made with hands.

Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute, but
also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as
nothing, and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and the world
worships."

When they heard this they were filled with anger, and cried
out, saying, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"

The whole
city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into
the theater, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia,
Paul's companions in travel.

When Paul wanted to enter in to
the people, the disciples didn't allow him.

Certain also of the
Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture
into the theater.

Some therefore cried one thing, and some
another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn't know
why they had come together.

They brought Alexander out of the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his
hand, and would have made a defense to the people.

But when
they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for a time of
about two hours cried out, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"

When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, "You
men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't know that the city of the
Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of the
image which fell down from Zeus?

Seeing then that these things
can't be denied, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash.

For you have brought these men here, who are neither robbers of temples
nor blasphemers of your goddess.

If therefore Demetrius and the
craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone, the courts are
open, and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one
another.

But if you seek anything about other matters, it will
be settled in the regular assembly.

For indeed we are in danger
of being accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause.
Concerning it, we wouldn't be able to give an account of this
commotion."

When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples,
took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia.

When he
had gone through those parts, and had encouraged them with many words,
he came into Greece.

When he had spent three months there, and a
plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for
Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia.

These
accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and
Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus
and Trophimus of Asia.

But these had gone ahead, and were
waiting for us at Troas.

We sailed away from Philippi after the
days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where
we stayed seven days.

On the first day of the week, when the disciples were
gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to
depart on the next day, and continued his speech until midnight.

There were many lights in the upper chamber where we were gathered
together.

A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window,
weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being weighed
down by his sleep, he fell down from the third story, and was taken up
dead.

Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said,
"Don't be troubled, for his life is in him."

When he had gone up, and had broken bread, and eaten, and
had talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he
departed.

They brought the boy alive, and were not a little
comforted.

But we who went ahead to the ship set sail for Assos, there
intending to take in Paul, for he had so arranged, intending himself to
go by land.

When he met us at Assos, we took him in, and came
to Mitylene.

Sailing from there, we came the following day
opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at
Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus.

For Paul had
determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time
in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be at
Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

From Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to himself the
elders of the assembly.

When they had come to him, he said to
them, "You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia,
how I was with you all the time,

serving the Lord with all
humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the
plots of the Jews;

how I didn't shrink from declaring to you
anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to
house,

testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now, behold, I go
bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me
there;

except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city,
saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me.

But these things
don't count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish
my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord
Jesus, to fully testify to the gospel of the grace of God.

Now, behold, I know that you all, among whom I went about
preaching the Kingdom of God, will see my face no more.

Therefore I testify to you this day that I am clean from the blood of
all men,

for I didn't shrink from declaring to you the whole
counsel of God.

Take heed, therefore, to yourselves, and to all
the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd
the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his own blood.

For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter
in among you, not sparing the flock.

Men will arise from among
your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples
after them.

Therefore watch, remembering that for a period of
three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day with
tears.

Now, brothers, I entrust you to God, and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you the inheritance
among all those who are sanctified.

I coveted no one's silver,
or gold, or clothing.

You yourselves know that these hands
ministered to my necessities, and to those who were with me.

In
all things I gave you an example, that so laboring you ought to help
the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself
said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'"

When he had spoken these things, he kneeled down and prayed
with them all.

They all wept a lot, and fell on Paul's neck and
kissed him,

sorrowing most of all because of the word which he
had spoken, that they should see his face no more. They brought him on
his way to the ship.

When it happened that we had parted from them and had set
sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to
Rhodes, and from there to Patara.

Having found a ship crossing
over to Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail.

When we had
come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to
Syria, and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload her cargo.

Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said
to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.

When it happened that we had accomplished the days, we departed
and went on our journey. They all, with wives and children, brought us
on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling down on the beach,
we prayed.

After saying goodbye to each other, we went on board
the ship, and they returned home again.

When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at
Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers, and stayed with them one day.

On the next day, we, who were Paul's companions, departed, and
came to Caesarea.

 We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of
the seven, and stayed with him.

Now this man had four virgin
daughters who prophesied.

As we stayed there some days, a
certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.

Coming to
us, and taking Paul's belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said,
"Thus says the Holy Spirit: 'So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man
who owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles.'"

When we heard these things, both we and they of that place
begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.

Then Paul answered, "What
are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only
to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus."

When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, "The
Lord's will be done."

After these days we took up our baggage and went up to
Jerusalem.

Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with
us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we
would stay.

When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us
gladly.

The day following, Paul went in with us to James; and
all the elders were present.

When he had greeted them, he
reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles
through his ministry.

They, when they heard it, glorified God.
They said to him, "You see, brother, how many thousands there are among
the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for the
law.

They have been informed about you, that you teach all the
Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to
circumcise their children neither to walk after the customs.

What then? The assembly must certainly meet, for they will hear that
you have come.

Therefore do what we tell you. We have four men
who have a vow on them.

Take them, and purify yourself with
them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads.
Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have
been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the
law.

But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written
our decision that they should observe no such thing, except that they
should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from
strangled things, and from sexual immorality."

Then Paul took the men, and the next day, purified himself
and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the
days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of
them.

When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from
Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and
laid hands on him,

crying out, "Men of Israel, help! This is
the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law,
and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple, and
has defiled this holy place!"

For they had seen Trophimus, the
Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought
him into the temple.

All the city was moved, and the people ran together. They
seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors
were shut.

As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the
commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.

Immediately he took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to
them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped
beating Paul.

Then the commanding officer came near, arrested
him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was
and what he had done.

Some shouted one thing, and some another,
among the crowd. When he couldn't find out the truth because of the
noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks.

When he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried
by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd;

for the
multitude of the people followed after, crying out, "Away with him!"

As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the
commanding officer, "May I say something to you?"

 He said, "Do you know Greek?

Aren't you then the Egyptian,
who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the
wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?"

But Paul said, "I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a
citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the
people."

When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the
stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great
silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,

"Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make
to you."

When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language,
they were even more quiet. He said,

"I am indeed a Jew, born in
Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel,
instructed according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers,
being zealous for God, even as you all are this day.

I
persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons
both men and women.

As also the high priest and all the council
of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the
brothers, and journeyed to Damascus to bring them also who were there
to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished.

It happened that, as I
made my journey, and came close to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there
shone from the sky a great light around me.

I fell to the
ground, and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why do you
persecute me?'

I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said to me,
'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.'

"Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid,
but they didn't understand the voice of him who spoke to me.

I
said, 'What shall I do, Lord?' The Lord said to me, 'Arise, and go into
Damascus. There you will be told about all things which are appointed
for you to do.'

When I couldn't see for the glory of that
light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into
Damascus.

One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well
reported of by all the Jews who lived there,

came to me, and
standing by me said to me, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' In that
very hour I looked up at him.

He said, 'The God of our fathers
has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and
to hear a voice from his mouth.

For you will be a witness for
him to all men of what you have seen and heard.

Now why do you
wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name
of the Lord.'

"It happened that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and
while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance,

and saw him
saying to me, 'Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they
will not receive testimony concerning me from you.'

I said,
'Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every
synagogue those who believed in you.

When the blood of Stephen,
your witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his
death, and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.'

"He said to me, 'Depart, for I will send you out far from
here to the Gentiles.'"

They listened to him until he said that, then they lifted up
their voice, and said, "Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn't fit
to live!"

As they cried out, and threw off their cloaks, and threw
dust into the air,

the commanding officer commanded him to be
brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging,
that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that.

When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the centurion
who stood by, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman,
and not found guilty?"

When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding
officer and told him, "Watch what you are about to do, for this man is
a Roman!"

The commanding officer came and asked him, "Tell me, are you
a Roman?"

 He said, "Yes."

The commanding officer answered, "I bought my citizenship
for a great price."

 Paul said, "But I was born a Roman."

Immediately those who were about to examine him departed
from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized
that he was a Roman, because he had bound him.

But on the next
day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews,
he freed him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all
the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before
them.

Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, "Brothers, I
have lived before God in all good conscience until this day."

The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to
strike him on the mouth.

Then Paul said to him, "God will strike you, you whitewashed
wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me to be
struck contrary to the law?"

Those who stood by said, "Do you malign God's high priest?"

Paul said, "I didn't know, brothers, that he was high priest.
For it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your
people.'"

But when Paul perceived that the one part were
Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, "Men
and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope
and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!"

When he had said this, an argument arose between the
Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.

For the
Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit;
but the Pharisees confess all of these.

A great clamor arose,
and some of the scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and contended,
saying, "We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has
spoken to him, let's not fight against God!"

When a great argument arose, the commanding officer, fearing
that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go
down and take him by force from among them, and bring him into the
barracks.

The following night, the Lord stood by him, and said, "Cheer
up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must
testify also at Rome."

When it was day, some of the Jews banded together, and bound
themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink
until they had killed Paul.

There were more than forty people
who had made this conspiracy.

They came to the chief priests
and the elders, and said, "We have bound ourselves under a great curse,
to taste nothing until we have killed Paul.

Now therefore, you
with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him
down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more
exactly. We are ready to kill him before he comes near."

But Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, and he
came and entered into the barracks and told Paul.

Paul summoned
one of the centurions, and said, "Bring this young man to the
commanding officer, for he has something to tell him."

So he took him, and brought him to the commanding officer,
and said, "Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked me to bring this
young man to you, who has something to tell you."

The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going
aside, asked him privately, "What is it that you have to tell me?"

He said, "The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring down Paul
tomorrow to the council, as though intending to inquire somewhat more
accurately concerning him.

Therefore don't yield to them, for
more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves
under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him.
Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you."

So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging
him, "Tell no one that you have told these things to me."

He
called to himself two of the centurions, and said, "Prepare two hundred
soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy horsemen, and two
hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the night."

He asked them to provide animals, that they might set Paul on one, and
bring him safely to Felix the governor.

He wrote a letter like
this:

"Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix:
Greetings.

"This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed
by them, when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned
that he was a Roman.

Desiring to know the cause why they
accused him, I brought him down to their council.

I found him
to be accused about questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to
his charge worthy of death or of bonds.

When I was told that
the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately,
charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him
before you. Farewell."

So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and
brought him by night to Antipatris.

But on the next day they
left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks.

They, when they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the
governor, presented Paul also before him.

When the governor had
read it, he asked what province he was from. When he understood that he
was from Cilicia, he said,

"I will hear you fully when your
accusers also arrive." He commanded that he be kept in Herod's palace.

After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with
certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor
against Paul.

When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him,
saying, "Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that excellent
measures are coming to this nation,

we accept it in all ways and
in all places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.

But,
that I don't delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few
words.

For we have found this man to be a plague, an instigator
of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.

He even tried to
profane the temple. We arrested him.



By examining him
yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him."

The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these
things were so.

When the governor had beckoned to him to speak,
Paul answered, "Because I know that you have been a judge of this
nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense,

seeing
that you can recognize that it is not more than twelve days since I
went up to worship at Jerusalem.

In the temple they didn't find
me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the
synagogues, or in the city.

Nor can they prove to you the
things whereof they now accuse me.

But this I confess to you,
that after the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our
fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which
are written in the prophets;

having hope toward God, which
these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and unjust.

Herein I also practice
always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men.

Now after some years, I came to bring gifts to the needy to my nation,
and offerings;

amid which certain Jews from Asia found me
purified in the temple, with no crowd, nor yet with tumult.

They ought to have been here before you, and to make accusation, if
they had anything against me.

Or else let these men themselves
say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council,

unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among
them, 'Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before
you today!'"

But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way,
deferred them, saying, "When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes
down, I will decide your case."

He ordered the centurion that
Paul should be kept in custody, and should have some privileges, and
not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him.

But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla, his wife, who was a
Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ
Jesus.

As he reasoned about righteousness, self-control, and
the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and answered, "Go your way
for this time, and when it is convenient for me, I will summon you."

He hoped that way that money would be given to him by Paul,
that he might release him. Therefore also he sent for him more often,
and talked with him.

But when two years were fulfilled, Felix
was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the
Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.

Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three
days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

Then the high priest
and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they
begged him,

asking a favor against him, that he would send for
him to Jerusalem; plotting to kill him on the way.

However
Festus answered that Paul was kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he
himself was about to depart shortly.

"Let them therefore," said
he, "that are in power among you go down with me, and if there is
anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him."

When he had stayed among them more than ten days, he went
down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat, and
commanded Paul to be brought.

When he had come, the Jews who had
come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many
and grievous charges which they could not prove,

while he said
in his defense, "Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the
temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all."

But Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered
Paul and said, "Will you go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these things before me?"

But Paul said, "I am standing before Caesar's judgment seat,
where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you
also know very well.

For if I have done wrong, and have
committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none
of those things is true that these accuse me of, no one can give me up
to them. I appeal to Caesar!"

Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council,
answered, "You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you will go."

Now when some days had passed, Agrippa the King and Bernice
arrived at Caesarea, and greeted Festus.

As they stayed there
many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the King, saying, "There is a
certain man left a prisoner by Felix;

about whom, when I was at
Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me,
asking for a sentence against him.

To whom I answered that it
is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction,
before the accused have met the accusers face to face, and have had
opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him.

When therefore they had come together here, I didn't delay, but
on the next day sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be
brought.

Concerning whom, when the accusers stood up, they
brought no charge of such things as I supposed;

but had certain
questions against him of their own religion, and of one Jesus, who was
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

I, being perplexed how to
inquire concerning these things, asked whether he would go to Jerusalem
and there be judged concerning these matters.

But when Paul had
appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to
be kept until I could send him to Caesar."

Agrippa said to Festus, "I also would like to hear the man
myself."

 "Tomorrow," he said, "you will hear him."

So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with
great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the
commanding officers and principal men of the city, at the command of
Festus, Paul was brought in.

Festus said, "King Agrippa, and
all men who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all
the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here,
crying that he ought not to live any longer.

But when I found
that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself
appealed to the emperor I determined to send him.

Of whom I
have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him
forth before you, and especially before you, king Agrippa, that, after
examination, I may have something to write.

For it seems to me
unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges
against him."

Agrippa said to Paul, "You may speak for yourself."

 Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense.

"I
think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defense before
you this day concerning all the things whereof I am accused by the
Jews,

especially because you are expert in all customs and
questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me
patiently.

"Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up,
which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem;

having known me from the first, if they are willing to testify,
that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.

Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made
by God to our fathers,

which our twelve tribes, earnestly
serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am
accused by the Jews, King Agrippa!

Why is it judged incredible
with you, if God does raise the dead?

"I myself most assuredly thought that I ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

This I also
did in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having
received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to
death I gave my vote against them.

Punishing them often in all
the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly
enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

"Whereupon as I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and
commission from the chief priests,

at noon, O King, I saw on
the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me
and those who traveled with me.

When we had all fallen to the
earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, 'Saul,
Saul, why do you persecute me? It is hard for you to kick against the
goads.'

"I said, 'Who are you, Lord?'

 "He said, 'I am Jesus, whom you persecute.

But arise, and
stand on your feet, for to this end have I appeared to you, to appoint
you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen, and
of the things which I will reveal to you;

delivering you from
the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,

to open
their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the
power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an
inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'

"Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision,

but declared first to them of Damascus, at
Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy
of repentance.

For this reason the Jews seized me in the
temple, and tried to kill me.

Having therefore obtained the
help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and
great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses did say should
come,

how the Christ must suffer, and how he first by the
resurrection of the dead should proclaim light both to these people and
to the Gentiles."

As he thus made his defense, Festus said with a loud voice,
"Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!"

But he said, "I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but
boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness.

For the king
knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded
that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not been
done in a corner.

King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I
know that you believe."

Agrippa said to Paul, "With a little persuasion are you
trying to make me a Christian?"

Paul said, "I pray to God, that whether with little or with
much, not only you, but also all that hear me this day, might become
such as I am, except for these bonds."

The king rose up with the governor, and Bernice, and those
who sat with them.

When they had withdrawn, they spoke one to
another, saying, "This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds."

Agrippa said to Festus, "This man might have been set free if
he had not appealed to Caesar."

When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius,
of the Augustan band.

Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which
was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea;
Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

The
next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him
permission to go to his friends and refresh himself.

Putting to
sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds
were contrary.

When we had sailed across the sea which is off
Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.

There
the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put
us on board.

When we had sailed slowly many days, and had come
with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we
sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.

With difficulty
sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near
the city of Lasea.

When much time was spent, and the voyage was now dangerous,
because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them,

and said to them, "Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury
and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our
lives."

But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to
the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul.

Because the haven was not suitable to winter in, the majority
advised to put to sea from there, if by any means they could reach
Phoenix, and winter there, which is a port of Crete, looking northeast
and southeast.

When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had
obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete,
close to shore.

But after no long time there beat down from it
a tempestuous wind, which is called Euroclydon.

When the ship
was caught, and couldn't face the wind, we gave way to it, and were
driven along.

Running under the lee of a small island called
Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat.

When
they had hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship.
Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they
lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven.

As we labored
exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things
overboard.

On the third day, they threw out the ship's tackle
with their own hands.

When neither sun nor stars shone on us
for many days, and no small tempest pressed on us, all hope that we
would be saved was now taken away.

When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the
midst of them, and said, "Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not
have set sail from Crete, and have gotten this injury and loss.

Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life among
you, but only of the ship.

For there stood by me this night an
angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve,

saying, 'Don't be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. Behold,
God has granted you all those who sail with you.'

Therefore,
sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been
spoken to me.

But we must run aground on a certain island."

But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven
back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised
that they were drawing near to some land.

They took soundings,
and found twenty fathoms. After a little while, they took soundings
again, and found fifteen fathoms.

Fearing that we would run
aground on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and
wished for daylight.

As the sailors were trying to flee out of
the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they
would lay out anchors from the bow,

Paul said to the centurion
and to the soldiers, "Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be
saved."

Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat, and
let her fall off.

While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take
some food, saying, "This day is the fourteenth day that you wait and
continue fasting, having taken nothing.

Therefore I beg you to
take some food, for this is for your safety; for there will not a hair
perish from the head of any of you."

When he had said this, and
had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all, and he
broke it, and began to eat.

Then they all cheered up, and they
also took food.

We were in all in the ship two hundred
seventy-six souls.

When they had eaten enough, they lightened
the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.

When it was day,
they didn't recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a
beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it.

Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time
untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they
made for the beach.

But coming to a place where two seas met,
they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable, but
the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.

The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that
none of them would swim out and escape.

But the centurion,
desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded
that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go
to the land;

and the rest, some on planks, and some on other
things from the ship. So it happened that they all escaped safely to
the land.

When we had escaped, then we knew that the island was called
Malta.

The natives shown us no common kindness; for they kindled
a fire, and received us all, because of the present rain, and because
of the cold.

But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and
laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat, and
fastened on his hand.

When the natives saw the creature hanging
from his hand, they said one to another, "No doubt this man is a
murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not
allowed to live."

However he shook off the creature into the
fire, and wasn't harmed.

But they expected that he would have
swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they were long in
expectation and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their
minds, and said that he was a god.

Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to
the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us, and
courteously entertained us three days.

It was so, that the
father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to
him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him.

Then when
this was done, the rest also that had diseases in the island came, and
were cured.

They also honored us with many honors, and when we
sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.

After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria
which had wintered in the island, whose sign was "The Twin Brothers."

Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three days.

From
there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south
wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli,

where
we found brothers, and were entreated to stay with them seven days. So
we came to Rome.

From there the brothers, when they heard of
us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three
Taverns; whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.

When we entered into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the
captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the
soldier who guarded him.

It happened that after three days Paul called together those
who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said
to them, "I, brothers, though I had done nothing against the people, or
the customs of our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem
into the hands of the Romans,

who, when they had examined me,
desired to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me.

But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal
to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation.

For this cause therefore I asked you to see and to speak with
me. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain."

They said to him, "We neither received letters from Judea
concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or
speak any evil of you.

But we desire to hear from you what you
think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere
it is spoken against."

When they had appointed him a day, they came to him into his
lodging in great number. He explained to them, testifying about the
Kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law
of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening.

Some believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved.

When they didn't agree among themselves, they departed after
Paul had spoken one word, "The Holy Spirit spoke well through Isaiah,
the prophet, to our fathers,

saying,
'Go to this people, and say,
In hearing, you will hear,
 And will in no way understand.
In seeing, you will see,
 And will in no way perceive.

For this people's heart has grown callous.
 Their ears are dull of hearing.
 Their eyes they have closed.
Lest they should see with their eyes,
 Hear with their ears,
 Understand with their heart,
 And would turn again,
 And I would heal them.'

"Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation of God is
sent to the Gentiles. They will also hear."

When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a
great dispute among themselves.

Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and
received all who went in to him,

preaching the Kingdom of God,
and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all
boldness, without hinderance.