THE ROMAN QUESTIONS
					 (QUAESTIONES ROMANAE) 
 	 
 	 INTRODUCTION 
 
 The Roman Questions is an attempt to explain one
					hundred and thirteen Roman customs, the majority
					of which deal with religious matters. The treatise
					is one of three similar compilations of wThich two
					have been preserved and one, the Quaestiones Barbaricae 
					(No. 139 in Lamprias's list), has been lost.
					Plutarch possessed a great desire to know the
					reason why: besides the many discussions of a
					similar sort contained in the Symposiacs ( Table Talk ),
					there is extant a discussion of Physical Causes , and
					the titles of other writings of the same sort have
					been preserved for us in Lamprias's list of Plutarch's
					writings. 
				 
 The Greek title, which means causes , is twice
					mentioned by Plutarch himself in the Lives , and
					we might call it The Reasons Why. In nearly
					every case at least two and often more reasons are
					given: of these presumably not more than one can
					be right. Thus the other explanations will embody
					the results of Plutarch's researches on the matter
					or his own quaint speculations. Consequently the
					book, which is an important source for Roman
					
					 
					
					customs, especially for religious customs, has been
					of the greatest service to students of early Roman
					religion, a field in which so little is certain and which
					provides (even as it provided for Plutarch) such
					glorious opportunities for speculation that it has
					been somewhat overtilled in recent years. Anyone
					interested in such matters may observe the trend of
					this scholarship if he will examine F. B. Jevons'
					reprint of Holland's translation of the Roman
					Questions (London, 1892): or better, H. J. Rose,
					 The Roman Questions of Plutarch, a New Translation
					with Introductory Essays and a Running Commentary 
					(Oxford, 1924). Professor Rose might, indeed, have
					improved his translation by consulting some good
					Greek lexicon: but the essays and the commentary
					are very valuable, for they contain, among
					other matters of interest, a discussion of Plutarch's
					sources and of early Roman religion: the commentary
					is fortified with abundant references to ancient
					writers and to modern scholars. It is a scholarly
					work and the most important contribution to the
					study of the Roman Questions since Wyttenbach.
				 
 This treatise could hardly have been written by a
					person ignorant of Latin. Plutarch in his Life of
					Demosthenes , chap, ii., modestly disavows any profound
					knowledge of Latin: yet he had read a considerable
					amount in the language and had spent
					some time in Rome. Hence he was quite able to
					use Latin works in compiling the Roman Questions .
					Some Roman writers he mentions by name, especially
					Varro, and Verrius Flaccus, an antiquarian of
					the Augustan age. Livy is specifically cited but
					twice in the Moralia , once in the present work and
					once in De Fortuna Romanorum ; yet he is referred
					
					 
					
					to no less than twelve times in the Lives , most of
					these citations being in the Marcellus and the
					 Camillus . Perhaps Plutarch's more exact acquaintance
					with Livy, if he ever acquired this, dates
					from a time later than the period during which
					he was engaged in the compilation of the Roman
					Questions .
				 
 Other Roman authorities are mentioned occasionally,
					such as Cato the Elder, Nigidius Figulus,
					Antistius Labeo, Ateius Capito, and Fenestella:
					but no doubt they and others are used in accounts
					introduced by such expressions as they say, 
					 some say, 
 the story is told, and the like. Some
					of these references have, in fact, been traced by
					scholars to their originals. It has been remarked
					of Cicero that any statement found in that author's
					works appears, or has appeared, elsewhere. The
					same affirmation might be made of Plutarch with
					some confidence. Unless he specifically testifies to
					oral tradition or hearsay, we may be certain that
					his facts, like Cicero's, are drawn from his extensive
					reading.
				 
 Critics lay stress on a few mistakes which Plutarch
					made in interpreting Latin (these will be found
					noted in Rose and in Hartman), but against them
					must be set the unnumbered instances in which he is
					right. He did not, however, have to depend wholly
					on Latin writers, for he undoubtedly had at hand
					the Roman Antiquities of Dionysius of Halicarnassus
 	(1st cent. b.c.) and the works of Juba, the scholarly
					king of Mauretania, who as a youth had been brought
					to Rome in 46 b.c. to grace the triumph of Julius
					Caesar. Juba became greatly interested in Roman
					
					 
					
					customs, and wrote a book in which he paralleled
					them with the customs of other peoples.
				 
 Many of the matters discussed in the Roman
					Questions are to be found treated elsewhere in
					Plutarch's work, particularly in the Roman Lives .
					The Lives of Romulus and of Numa are especially
					rich in parallel passages: for very many of the
					Roman customs were thought to go back to the
					earliest period of Roman history.
				 
 The book was probably published after the death
					of Domitian in a.d, 96, though this is a not quite
					certain inference from the text (276 e). The work
					is No. 138 in Lamprias's catalogue of Plutarch's
					works. The . ms. tradition (on which see J. B.
					Titchener, University of Illinois Studies , ix., 1924) is
					good.

Why do they bid the bride touch fire and water?
				 
 Is it that of these two, being reckoned as elements
					or first principles, fire is masculine and water feminine, and fire supplies the beginnings of motion and
					water the function of the subsistent element or the
					material?
				 
 Or is it because fire purifies and water cleanses,
					and a married woman must remain pure and clean?
				 
 Or is it that, just as fire without moisture is unsustaining and arid, and water without heat is unproductive and inactive, so also male and female apart
					from each other are inert, but their union in marriage
					produces the perfection of their life together?
				 
 Or is it that they must not desert each other, but
					must share together every sort of fortune, even if
					they are destined to have nothing other than fire
					and water to share with each other?

Why in the marriage rites do they light five
					torches, neither more nor less, which they call
					 cereones ?
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it, as Varro has stated, that while the praetors
					use three, the aediles have a right to more, and it is
					from the aediles that the wedding party light their
					torches?
				 
 Or is it because in their use of several numbers
					the odd number was considered better and more perfect for various purposes and also better adapted to
					marriage? For the even number admits division and
					its equality of division suggests strife and opposition:
					the odd number, however, cannot be divided into
					equal parts at all, but whenever it is divided it
					always leaves behind a remainder of the same nature
					as itself. Now, of the odd numbers, five is above all
					the nuptial number; for three is the first odd number,
					and two is the first even number, and five is composed
					of the union of these two, as it were of male and
					female. 
				 
 Or is it rather that, since light is the symbol of
					birth, and women in general are enabled by nature
					to bear, at the most, five children at one birth, the
					wedding company makes use of exactly that number
					of torches?
				 
 Or is it because they think that the nuptial pair
					has need of five deities: Zeus Teleios, Hera Teleia,
					Aphrodite, Peitho, and finally Artemis, whom women
					in child-birth and travail are wont to invoke?

Why is it that, although there are many shrines
					of Diana in Rome, the only one into which men may
					not enter is the shrine in the so-called Vicus Patricius?
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because of the current legend? For a man
					attempted to violate a woman who was here worshipping the goddess, and was torn to pieces by the dogs:
					and men do not enter because of the superstitious fear
					that arose from this occurrence.

Why do they, as might be expected, nail up
					stags' horns in all the other shrines of Diana, but in
					the shrine on the Aventine nail up horns of cattle?
				 
 Is it because they remember the ancient occurrence? For the tale is told that among the Sabines
					in the herds of Antro Curiatius was born a heifer
					excelling all the others in appearance and size.
					When a certain soothsayer told him that the city
					of the man who should sacrifice that heifer to
					Diana on the Aventine was destined to become the
					mightiest city and to rule all Italy, the man carne
					to Rome with intent to sacrifice his heifer. But a
					servant of his secretly told the prophecy to the king
					Servius, who told Cornelius the priest, and Cornelius
					gave instructions to Antro to bathe in the Tiber before
					the sacrifice: for this, said he, was the custom of
					those whose sacrifice was to be acceptable. Accordingly Antro went away and bathed, but Servius
					sacrificed the heifer to Diana before Antro could
					return, and nailed the horns to the shrine. This tale
					both Juba and Varro have recorded, except that
					Varro has not noted the name of Antro: and he says
					that the Sabine was cozened, not by Cornelius the
					priest, but by the keeper of the temple.

Why is it that those who are falsely reported to
					
					 
					
					have died in a foreign country, even if they return,
					men do not admit by the door, but mount upon the
					roof-tiles and let them down inside?
				 
 Varro gives an explanation of the cause that is
					quite fabulous. For he says that in the Sicilian war
					there was a great naval battle, and in the case of
					many men a false report spread that they were dead.
					But, when they had returned home, in a short time
					they all carne to their end except one who, when he
					tried to enter, found the doors shutting against him
					of their own accord, nor did they yield when he strove
					to open them. The man fell asleep there before his
					threshold and in his sleep saw a vision, which instructed him to climb upon the roof and let himself
					down into the house. When he had done so, he
					prospered and lived to an advanced age: and from
					this occurrence the custom became established for
					succeeding generations.
				 
 But consider if this be not in some wise similar
					to Greek customs; for the Greeks did not consider
					pure, nor admit to familiar intercourse, nor suffer to
					approach the temples any person for whom a funeral
					had been held and a tomb constructed on the
					assumption that they were dead. The tale is told
					that Aristinus, a victim of this superstition, sent to
					Delphi and besought the god to release him from
					the difficulties in which he was involved because
					of the custom: and the prophetic priestess gave
					response:
					 
 All that a woman in childbed does at the birth of her
					baby,
					 
 When this again thou hast done, to the blessed gods
					sacrifice offer. 
 
					Aristinus, accordingly, chose the part of wisdom and
					
					 
					
					delivered himself like a new-born babe into the hands
					of women to be washed, and to be wrapped in
					swaddling-clothes, and to be suckled: and all other
					men in such plight do likewise and they are called
					 Men of Later Fate. But some will have it that
					this was done in the case of such persons even before
					Aristinus, and that the custom is ancient. Hence it
					is nothing surprising if the Romans also did not think
					it right to admit by the door, through which they go
					out to sacrifice and come in from sacrificing, those
					who are thought to have been buried once and for all
					and to belong to the company of the departed, but
					bade them descend from the open air above into that
					portion of the house which is exposed to the sky.
					And with good reason, for, naturally, they perform all
					their rites of purification under the open sky.

Why do the women kiss their kinsmen on the
					lips?
				 
 Is it, as most authorities believe, that the drinking
					of wine was forbidden to women, and therefore, so
					that women who had drunk wine should not escape
					detection, but should be detected when they chanced
					to meet men of their household, the custom of kissing
					was established?
				 
 Or is it for the reason which Aristotle the philosopher has recorded? For that far-famed deed, the
					scene of which is laid in many different places, was
					dared, it appears, by the Trojan women, even on the
					very shores of Italy. For when they had reached
					the coast, and the men had disembarked, the women
					set fire to the ships, since, at all hazards, they desired
					to be quit of their wanderings and their sea-faring.
					
					 
					
					But they were afraid of their husbands, and greeted
					with a kiss and a warm embrace such of their kinsmen
					and members of their household as they encountered:
					and when the men had ceased from their wrath and
					had become reconciled, the women continued thereafter as well to employ this mark of affection towards
					them.
				 
 Or was this rather bestowed upon the women as a
					privilege that should bring them both honour and
					power if they should be seen to have many good men
					among their kinsmen and in their household?
				 
 Or is it that, since it is not the custom for men to
					marry blood relations, affection proceeded only so
					far as a kiss, and this alone remained as a token of
					kinship and a participation therein? For formerly
					men did not marry women related to them by ties
					of blood, just as even now they do not marry their
					aunts or their sisters ; but after a long time they
					made the concession of allowing wedlock with
					cousins for the following reason: a man possessed
					of no property, but otherwise of excellent character
					and more satisfactory to the people than other public
					men, had as wife his cousin, an heiress, and was
					thought to be growing rich from her estate. He was
					accused on this ground, but the people would not even
					try the case and dismissed the charge, enacting a
					decree that ali might marry cousins or more distant
					relatives: but marriage with nearer kin was prohibited.

Why is it forbidden for a man to receive a gift
					from his wife or a wife to receive a gift from her
					husband? 
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it that, Solon having promulgated a law that
					the bequests of the deceased should be valid unless
					a man were constrained by force or persuaded by his
					wife, whereby he excepted force as overriding the
					free will, and pleasure as misleading the judgement,
					in this way the bequests of wives and husbands
					became suspect?
				 
 Or did they regard giving as an utterly worthless
					token of aifection (for even strangers and persons
					with no kindly feelings give gifts), and so deprived
					the marriage relationship of this mode of giving
					pleasure, that mutual affection might be unbought
					and free, existing for its own sake and for no other
					reason?
				 
 Or is it that women are most likely to be seduced
					and welcome strangers because of gifts they receive
					from them: and thus it is seen to be dignified for
					them to love their own husbands even though their
					husbands give them no gifts?
				 
 Or is it rather that both the husbands' property
					should be held in common with their wives and
					the wives' with their husbands? For anyone who
					accepts what is given learns to regard what is not
					given to him as belonging to another, with the
					result that by giving a little to each other they
					deprive each other of all else that they own.

Why among the Romans is it forbidden to receive
					a gift from a son-in-law or from a father-in-law?
				 
 Is the father-in-law prevented from receiving a
					gift from his son-in-law, in order that the gift may
					not appear ultimately to reach the wife through her
					father? And is the son-in-law similarly prevented,
					since it is obviously just that he who may not give
					shall also not receive?

Why is it that, when men who have wives at
					home are returning either from the country or from
					abroad, they send ahead to tell their wives that they
					are coming?
				 
 Is it because this is the mark of a man who is
					confident that his wife is not up to any mischief,
					whereas coming suddenly and unexpectedly is, as
					it were, an arrival by stratagem and unfair vigilance:
					and are they eager to send good tidings about themselves to their wives as if they felt certain that their
					wives would be longing for them and expecting
					them?
				 
 Or is it rather that the men themselves long to
					hear news of their wives, if they shall find them safe
					at home and longing for their husbands?
				 
 Or is it because during their husbands' absence
					the wives have more household duties and occupations, and also dissensions and outbursts against
					those of the household? Therefore the notice is
					given in advance that the wife may rid herself of
					these matters and make for her husband his welcome
					home undisturbed and pleasant.

Why is it that when they worship the gods,
					they cover their heads, but when they meet any of
					their fellow-men worthy of honour, if they happen
					to have the toga over the head, they uncover? 
				 
 This second fact seems to intensify the difficulty
					of the first. If, then, the tale told of Aeneas is true,
					that, when Diomedes passed by, he covered his head
					and completed the sacrifice, it is reasonable and
					consistent with the covering of one's head in the
					presence of an enemy that men who meet good
					
					 
					
					men and their friends should uncover. In fact, the
					behaviour in regard to the gods is not properly
					related to this custom, but accidentally resembles
					it; and its observance has persisted since the days
					of Aeneas.
				 
 But if there is anything else to be said, consider
					whether it be not true that there is only one matter
					that needs investigation: why men cover their
					heads when they worship the gods: and the other
					follows from this. For they uncover their heads in
					the presence of men more influential than they:
					it is not to invest these men with additional honour,
					but rather to avert from them the jealousy of the
					gods, that these men may not seem to demand the
					same honours as the gods, nor to tolerate an attention like that bestowed, on the gods, nor to rejoice
					therein. But they thus worshipped the gods, either
					humbling themselves by concealing the head, or
					rather by pulling the toga over their ears as a
					precaution lest any ill-omened and baleful sound
					from without should reach them while they were
					praying. That they were mightily vigilant in this
					matter is obvious from the fact that when they went
					forth for purposes of divination, they surrounded
					themselves with the clashing of bronze.
				 
 Or, as Castor states when he is trying to bring
					Roman customs into relation with Pythagorean doctrines: the Spirit within us entreats and supplicates the gods without, and thus he symbolizes by
					the covering of the head the covering and concealment of the soul by the body.

Why do they sacrifice to Saturn with the head
					uncovered?
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because Aeneas instituted the custom of
					covering the head, and the sacrifice to Satum dates
					from long before that time?
				 
 Or is it that they cover the head before the
					heavenly deities, but they consider Saturn a god
					whose realm is beneath the earth? Or is it that no
					part of Truth is covered or overshadowed, and the
					Romans consider Saturn father of Truth?

And why do they consider Saturn father of
					Truth?
				 
 Is it that they think, as do certain philosophers, 
					that Saturn (Kronos) is Time (Chronos), and Time
					discovers the truth? Or because it is likely that the
					fabled Age of Saturn, if it was an age of the greatest
					righteousness, participated most largely in truth?

Why do they also sacrifice to the god called
					 Honor with the head uncovered? One might
					translate Honor as renown or honour. 
				 
 Is it because renown is a brilliant thing, conspicuous,
					and widespread, and for the reason that they uncover
					in the presence of good and honoured men, is it for
					this same reason that they also worship the god who
					is named for honour ?

Why do sons cover their heads when they
					escort their parents to the grave, while daughters
					go with uncovered heads and hair unbound?
				 
 Is it because fathers should be honoured as gods
					
					 
					
					by their male offspring, but mourned as dead by their
					daughters, that custom has assigned to each sex its
					proper part and has produced a fitting result from
					both?
				 
 Or is it that the unusual is proper in mourning, and
					it is more usual for women to go forth in public with
					their heads covered and men with their heads uncovered? So in Greece, whenever any misfortune
					comes, the women cut off their hair and the men let
					it grow, for it is usual for men to have their hair cut
					and for women to let it grow.
				 
 Or is it that it has become customary for sons to
					cover their heads for the reason already given? 
					For they turn about at the graves, as Varro relates,
					thus honouring the tombs of their fathers even as
					they do the shrines of the gods: and when they have
					cremated their parents, they declare that the dead
					person has become a god at the moment when first
					they find a bone. 
				 
 But formerly women were not allowed to cover the
					head at all. At least it is recorded that Spurius
					Carvilius was the first man to divorce his wife and
					the reason was her barrenness: the second was
					Sulpicius Gallus, because he saw his wife pull her
					cloak over her head: and the third was Publius
					Sempronius, because his wife had been present as
					a spectator at funeral games.

Why is it that they were wont to sacrifice no
					living creature to Terminus, in whose honour they
					held the Terminalia, although they regard him as a
					god?
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it that Romulus placed no boundary-stones for
					his country, so that Romans might go forth, seize
					land, and regard all as theirs, as the Spartan said, 
					which their spears could reach; whereas Numa
					Pompilius, a just man and a statesman, who had
					become versed in philosophy, marked out the
					boundaries between Rome and her neighbours, and,
					when on the boundary-stones he had formally
					installed Terminus as overseer and guardian of
					friendship and peace, he thought that Terminus
					should be kept pure and undefiled from blood and
					gore?

Why is it that it is forbidden to slave-women to
					set foot in the shrine of Matuta, and why do the
					women bring in one slave-woman only and slap her
					on the head and beat her? 
				 
 Is the beating of this slave but a symbol of the
					prohibition, and do they prevent the others from
					entering because of the legend? For Ino is said
					to have become madly jealous of a slave-woman on
					her husband's account, and to have vented her
					madness on her son. The Greeks relate that the
					slave was an Aetolian by birth and that her name
					was Antiphera. Wherefore also in my native town,
					Chaeroneia, the temple-guardian stands before the
					precinct of Leucothea and, taking a whip in his hand,
					makes proclamation: Let no slave enter, nor any
						Aetolian, man or woman!

Why is it that in the shrine of this goddess they
					do not pray for blessings on their own children, but
					only on their sisters' children? 
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because Ino was fond of her sister and suckled
					her sister's son also, but was herself unfortunate in
					her own children? Or is it that, quite apart from
					this reason, the custom is morally excellent and
					produces much goodwill among kindred?

Why was it the custom for many of the wealthy
					to give a tithe of their property to Hercules? 
				 
 Is it because he also sacrificed a tithe of Geryon's
					cattle in Rome? Or because he freed the Romans
					from paying a tithe to the Etruscans?
				 
 Or have these tales no historical foundation worthy
					of credence, but the Romans were wont to sacrifice
					lavishly and abundantly to Hercules as to an insatiable eater and a good trencher-man?
				 
 Or was it rather in curtailing their excessive wealth,
					since it was odious to their fellow-citizens, and in
					doing away with some of it, as from a lusty bodily
					vigour that had reached its culmination, did they
					think that thus Hercules would be especially honoured
					and pleased by such a way of using up and reducing
					overabundance, since in his own life he was frugal,
					self-sufficient, and free from extravagance?

Why do they adopt the month of January as
					the beginning of the new year? 
				 
 The fact is that, in ancient days, March was counted
					before January, as is clear from many different proofs,
					and particularly from the fact that the fifth month
					from March is called Quintilis, the sixth Sextilis, and
					
					 
					
					so on to the last, which they call December, since it
					is the tenth in order from March. Wherefore it has
					also naturally occurred to some to believe and to
					maintain that the ancient Romans completed their
					year, not in twelve months, but in ten, by adding
					more days than thirty to some of the months. Others
					state that December is the tenth from March,
					January the eleventh, and February the twelfth:
					and in this month they perform rites of purification
					and make offerings to the dead, since it is the end of
					the year. But the order of these months was altered,
					so they say, and January was put first because in this
					month on the day of the new moon, which they call
					the Kalends of January, the first consuls entered
					office after the kings had been expelled.
				 
 But more worthy of credence are they who maintain that it was because Romulus was a warrior and a
					lover of battle, and was thought to be a son of Mars,
					that he placed first the month which bore Mars'
					name. But Numa, in turn, who was a lover of peace,
					and whose ambition it was to turn the city towards
					husbandry and to divert it from war, gave the precedence to January and advanced the god Janus to
					great honours, since Janus was a statesman and a
					husbandman rather than a warrior. But consider
					whether Numa may not have adopted as the beginning of the year that which conforms to our conception of the natural beginning. Speaking generally, to be sure, there is not naturally either last or
					first in a cycle: and it is by custom that some adopt
					one beginning of this period and others another.
					They do best, however, who adopt the beginning
					
					 
					
					after the winter solstice, when the sun has ceased to
					advance, and turns about and retraces his course
					toward us. For this beginning of the year is in a
					certain way natural to mankind, since it increases the
					amount of light that we receive and decreases the
					amount of darkness, and brings nearer to us the lord
					and leader of all mobile matter.

Why is it that the women, when they adorn in
					their houses a shrine to the women's goddess, whom
					they call Bona Dea, bring in no myrtle, although
					they are very eager to make use of all manner of
					growing and blooming plants?
				 
 Was this goddess, as the mythologists relate, the
					wife of the seer Faunus; and was she secretly addicted
					to wine, but did not escape detection and was beaten
					by her husband with myrtle rods, and is this the
					reason why they do not bring in myrtle and, when
					they make libations of wine to her, call it milk?
				 
 Or is it because they remain pure from many
					things, particularly from venery, when they perform
					this holy service? For they not only exclude their
					husbands, but they also drive everything male out of
					the house whenever they conduct the customary ceremonies in honour of the goddess. So, because the
					myrtle is sacred to Venus, they religiously exclude it.
					For she whom they now call Venus Murcia, in ancient
					days, it seems, they styled Myrtia.

Why do the Latins revere the woodpecker and
					all strictly abstain from it?
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because, as they tell the tale, Picus, transformed by his wife's magic drugs, became a woodpecker and in that form gives oracles and prophecies
					to those who consult him?
				 
 Or is this wholly incredible and monstrous, and is
					that other tale more credible which relates that
					when Romulus and Remus were exposed, not only
					did a she-wolf suckle them, but also a certain woodpecker carne continually to visit them and bring them
					scraps of food? For generally, even to this day, in
					foot-hills and thickly wooded places where the woodpecker is found, there also is found the wolf, as
					Nigidius records.
				 
 Or is it rather because they regard this bird as
					sacred to Mars, even as other birds to other gods?
					For it is a courageous and spirited bird and has a beak
					so strong that it can overturn oaks by pecking them
					until it has reached the inmost part of the tree.

Why do they suppose Janus to have been twofaced and so represent him in painting and sculpture?
				 
 Is it because, as they relate, he was by birth a
					Greek from Perrhaebia, and, when he had crossed to
					Italy and had settled among the savages there, he
					changed both his speech and his habits? Or is it
					rather because he changed the people of Italy to
					another manner and form of life by persuading a
					people which had formerly made use of wild plants
					and lawless customs to till the soil and to live under
					organized government?

Why do they sell articles for funerals in the
					precinct of Libitina, whom they identify with Venus? 
				 
 Is this also one of the philosophic devices of king
					Numa, that they should learn not to feel repugnance
					at such things nor shun them as a pollution?
				 
 Or is it rather a reminder that whatever is born
					must die, since one goddess presides over births and
					deaths? For in Delphi there is a little statue of
					Aphrodite of the Tomb, to which they summon the
					departed to come forth for the libations.

Why have they in the month three beginnings
					or fixed points, and do not adopt the same interval
					of days between them?
				 
 Is it, as Juba and his followers relate, that on the
					Kalends the officials used to call the people and
					announce the Nones for the fifth day thereafter,
					regarding the Ides as a holy day?
				 
 Or is it rather because, since they measured time
					by the phases of the moon, they observed that in each
					month the moon undergoes three very important
					changes: first, when she is hidden by her conjunction with the sun: second, when she has escaped the
					sun's rays and becomes visible for the first time at
					sunset; and third, at the full moon, when her orb
					is completely round? The disappearance and concealment of the moon they call Kalendae , for everything
					
					 
					
					concealed or secretis clam , and to be concealed is celari . The first appearance of the
					moon they call Nones, the most accurate since
					it is the new moon: for their word for new and
					 novel is the same as ours. They name the Ides
					as they do either because of the beauty and form
					( eidos ) of the full-orbed moon, or by derivation from
					a title of Jupiter. But we must not follow out the
					most exact calculation of the number of days nor cast
					aspersions on approximate reckoning; since even
					now, when astronomy has made so much progress, the
					irregularity of the moon's movements is still beyond
					the skill of mathematicians, and continues to elude
					their calculations.

Why do they reckon the day that follows the
					Kalends, the Nones, or the Ides as unsuitable for
					leaving home or for travel?
				 
 Is it, as most authorities think and as Livy records,
					that on the day after the Ides of Quintilis, which
					they now call July, the military tribunes led out the
					army, and were vanquished in battle by the Gauls at
					the river Allia and lost the City? But when the day
					after the Ides had come to be regarded as ill-omened,
					did superstition, as is its wont, extend the custom
					
					 
					
					further, and involve in the same circumspection the
					day after the Nones and the day after the Kalends?
				 
 Or does this contain many irrational assumptions?
					For it was on a different day that they were defeated in
					battle, a day which they call Alliensis from the river,
					and make a dread day of expiation ; and although
					they have many ill-omened days, they do not observe
					them under the same names in each month, but each
					in the month in which it occurs: and it is thus quite
					incredible that the superstition should have attached
					itself simply to all the days that follow immediately
					after the Nones or the Kalends.
				 
 Consider the following analogy: just as they have
					dedicated the first month to the gods of Olympus,
					and the second, in which they perform certain rites
					of purification and sacrifice to the departed, to the
					gods of the lower world, so also in regard to the days
					of the month they have established three as festive
					and holy days, as I have stated, which are, as it
					were, fundamental and sovereign days: but the
					days which follow immediately they have dedicated
					to the spirits and the dead, and have come to regard
					them as ill-omened and unsuitable for business.
					In fact, the Greeks worship the gods on the day of
					the new moon: the next day they have duly assigned to the heroes and spirits, and the second bowl
					of wine is mixed in honour of the heroes and heroines, 
					And speaking generally, time is a sort of number:
					and the beginning of number is divine, for it is the
					monad. But after it is the dyad, antagonistic to
					the beginning number, and the first of the even
					numbers. The even numbers are imperfect, incomplete,
					
					 
					
					and indeterminate, just as the odd
					numbers are determinate, completing, and perfect. 
					Wherefore, in like manner, the Nones succeed the
					Kalends at an interval of five days and the Ides
					succeed the Nones at an interval of nine days.
					For the odd numbers define the beginnings, but the
					even numbers, since they occur after the beginnings,
					have no position nor power; therefore on these days
					they do not begin any business or travel.
				 
 Or has also the saying of Themistocles some
					foundation in reason? For once upon a time, said
					he, the Day-After had an altercation with the Feast-Day on the ground that the Feast-Day had much
					labour and toil, whereas she herself provided the
					opportunity of enjoying in leisure and quiet all the
					things prepared for the festival. To this the Feast-Day replied, You are quite right; but if I had not
						been, you would not be! This story Themistocles
					related to the Athenian generals who succeeded
					him, to show that they would have been nowhere,
					if he himself had not saved the city.
				 
 Since, therefore, all travel and all business of importance needs provision and preparation, and since
					in ancient days the Romans, at the time of festivals,
					made no provision or plan for anything, save only
					that they were engaged in the service of their gods
					and busied themselves with this only, just as even to
					this day the priests cause such a proclamation to be
					made in advance as they proceed on their way to
					sacrifice: so it was only natural that they did not
					set out on a journey immediately after their festivals,
					nor did they transact any business, for they were
					
					 
					
					unprepared; but that day they always spent at
					home making their plans and preparations.
				 
 Or is it even as men now, who have offered their
					prayers and oblations, are wont to tarry and sit a
					while in the temples, and so they would not let
					busy days succeed holy days immediately, but made
					some pause and breathing-space between, since
					business brings with it much that is distasteful and
					undesired?

Why do women in mourning wear white robes
					and white head-dresses?
				 
 Do they do this, as men say the Magi do, arraying
					themselves against Hades and the powers of darkness, and making themselves like unto Light and
					Brightness?
				 
 Or is it that, just as they clothe the body of the
					dead in white, they think it proper that the relatives
					should also wear this colour? They adorn the body
					thus since they cannot so adorn the soul; and they
					wish to send forth the soul bright and pure, since it
					is now set free after having fought the good fight in
					all its manifold forms.
				 
 Or are plainness and simplicity most becoming
					on these occasions? Of the dyed garments, some
					reflect expense, others over-elaboration: for we may
					say no less with reference to black than to purple:
					 These be cheating garments, these be cheating
						colours. 
 That which is naturally black is dyed
					not through art, but by nature: and when it is
					
					 
					
					combined with a dark colour, it is overpowered. 
					Only white, therefore, is pure, unmixed, and uncontaminated by dye, nor can it be imitated: wherefore it is most appropriate for the dead at burial.
					For he who is dead has become something simple,
					unmixed, and pure, once he has been released from
					the body, which is indeed to be compared with a
					stain made by dyeing. In Argos, as Socrates says,
					persons in mourning wear white garments washed
					in water.

Why do they regard all the city wall as inviolable and sacred, but not the gates?
				 
 Is it, as Varro has written, because the wall must
					be considered sacred that men may fight and die
					with enthusiasm in its defence? It was under such
					circumstances, it seems, that Romulus killed his
					brother because he was attempting to leap across a
					place that was inviolable and sacred, and to make it
					traversable and profane.
				 
 But it was impossible to consecrate the gates, for
					through them they carry out many other objectionable things and also dead bodies. Wherefore the
					original founders of a city yoke a bull and a
					cow, and mark out with a plough all the land on
					which they intend to build ; and when they are
					engaged in tracing the circuit of the walls, as they
					measure off the space intended for gates, they lift
					up the ploughshare and thus carry the plough across,
					
					 
					
					since they hold that all the land that is ploughed is
					to be kept sacred and inviolable.

Why do they tell children, whenever they
					would swear by Hercules, not to do so under a roof,
					and bid them go out into the open air? 
				 
 Is it, as some relate, because they believe that
					Hercules had no pleasure in staying in the house, but
					rejoiced in a life in the open air and a bed under the
					stars?
				 
 Or is it rather because Hercules is not one of the
					native gods, but a foreigner from afar? For neither
					do they swear under a roof by Bacchus, since he also
					is a foreign god if he is from Nysa.
				 
 Or is this but said in jest to the children, and what
					is done is really a check upon over-readiness and
					hastiness to swear, as Favorinus stated? For what
					is done following, as it were, upon preparation produces delay and allows deliberation. Yet one might
					urge against Favorinus the fact that this custom is not
					common, but peculiar to Hercules, as may be seen
					from the legend about him: for it is recorded that he
					was so circumspect regarding an oath that he swore
					but once and for Phyleus, the son of Augeas, alone.
					Wherefore they say that the prophetic priestess also
					brought up against the Spartans all the oaths they
					had sworn, saying that it would be better and much
					more to be desired if they would keep them!

Why do they not allow the bride to cross the
					threshold of her home herself, but those who are
					escorting her lift her over? 
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because they carried off by force also the first
					Roman brides and bore them in in this manner, and
					the women did not enter of their own accord?
				 
 Or do they wish it to appear that it is under constraint and not of their own desire that they enter a
					dwelling where they are about to lose their virginity?
				 
 Or is it a token that the woman may not go forth of
					her own accord and abandon her home if she be not
					constrained, just as it was under constraint that she
					entered it? So likewise among us in Boeotia they
					burn the axle of the bridal carriage before the door,
					signifying that the bride must remain, since her
					means of departure has been destroyed.

Why do they, as they conduct the bride to her
					home, bid her say, Where you are Gaius, there am
						I Gaia 
 ?
				 
 Is her entrance into the house upon fixed terms,
					as it were, at once to share everything and to control
					jointly the household, and is the meaning, then,
					 Wherever you are lord and master, there am I lady
						and mistress ? These names are in common use
					also in other connexions, just as jurists speak of
					Gaius Seius and Lucius Titius, and philosophers of
					Dion and Theon. 
				 
 Or do they use these names because of Gaia
					Caecilia, consort of one of Tarquini sons, a fair and
					virtuous woman, whose statue in bronze stands in the
					temple of Sanctus? And both her sandals and her
					spindle were, in ancient days, dedicated there as
					tokens of her love of home and of her industry
					respectively.

Why is the far-famed Talassio 
 sung at the
					marriage ceremony? 
				 
 Is it derived from talasia (spinning)? For they
					call the wool-basket ( talaros ) talasus . When they
					lead in the bride, they spread a fleece beneath her:
					she herself brings with her a distaff and her spindle,
					and wreaths her husband's door with wool.
				 
 Or is the statement of the historians true? They
					relate that there was a certain young man, brilliant
					in military achievements and valuable in other wTays,
					whose name was Talasius: and when the Romans
					were carrying off the daughters of the Sabines who
					had come to see the games, a maiden of particularly
					beautiful appearance was being carried off for him
					by some plebeian retainers of his. To protect their
					enterprise and to prevent anyone from approaching
					and trying to wrest the maiden from them, they
					shouted continually that she was being brought as a
					wife for Talasius ( Talasio ). Since, therefore, everyone honoured Talasius, they followed along and
					provided escort, joining in the good wishes and
					acclamations. Wherefore since Talasius's marriage
					was happy, they became accustomed to invoke
					Talasius in other marriages also, even as the Greeks
					invoke Hymen.

Why is it that in the month of May at the time
					of the full moon they throw into the river from the
					Pons Sublicius figures of men, calling the images
					thrown Argives? 
				 
 Is it because in ancient days the barbarians who
					
					 
					
					lived in these parts used to destroy thus the Greeks
					whom they captured? But Hercules, who was much
					admired by them, put an end to their murder of
					strangers and taught them to throw figures into the
					river, in imitation of their superstitious custom.
					The men of old used to call all Greeks alike Argives:
					unless it be, indeed, since the Arcadians regarded
					the Argives also as their enemies because of their
					immediate proximity, that, when Evander and his
					men fled from Greece and settled here, they continued to preserve their ancient feud and enmity.

Why in ancient days did they never dine out
					without their sons, even when these were still but
					children?
				 
 Did Lycurgus introduce this custom also, and bring
					boys to the common meals that they might become
					accustomed to conduct themselves toward their pleasures, not in a brutish or disorderly way, but with
					discretion, since they had their elders as supervisors
					and spectators, as it were? No less important is the
					fact that the fathers themselves would also be more
					decorous and prudent in the presence of their sons:
					for where the old are shameless, as Plato remarks,
					 there the young also must needs be lost to all sense
						of shame.

Why is it that while the other Romans make
					libations and offerings to the dead in the month of
					February, Decimus Brutus, as Cicero has recorded,
					used to do so in the month of December? This was
					
					 
					
					the Brutus who invaded Lusitania, and was the first
					to visit those remote places, and cross the river Lethê
					with an army. 
				 
 Since most peoples are accustomed to make offerings to the dead at the close of the day and at the
					end of the month, is it not reasonable also to honour
					the dead in the last month at the turn of the year?
					And December is the last month.
				 
 Or do these honours belong to deities beneath the
					earth, and is it the proper season to honour these
					deities when all the crops have attained consummation?
				 
 Or is it most fitting to remember those below when
					men are stirring the earth at the beginning of seed-time?
				 
 Or is it because this month has been consecrated
					to Saturn by the Romans, and they regard Saturn as
					an infernal, not a celestial god?
				 
 Or is it that then their greatest festival, the
					Saturnalia, is set: and it is reputed to contain the
					most numerous social gatherings and enjoyments, and
					therefore Brutus deemed it proper to bestow upon
					the dead first-fruits, as it were, of this festival also?
				 
 Or is this statement, that Brutus alone sacrificed
					to the dead in this month, altogether a falsehood?
					For it is in December that they make offerings to
					Larentia and bring libations to her sepulchre.

And why do they thus honour Larentia who
					was at one time a courtesan?
				 
 They record that there was another Larentia,
					Acca, the nurse of Romulus, whom they honour in
					
					 
					
					the month of April. But they say that the surname
					of the courtesan Larentia was Fabula. She became
					famous for the following reason : a certain keeper
					of the temple of Hercules enjoyed, it seems, considerable leisure and had the habit of spending the greater
					part of the day at draughts and dice: and one day, as
					it chanced, there was present no one of those who were
					wont to play with him and share the occupation of
					his leisure. So, in his boredom, he challenged the
					god to throw dice with him on fixed terms, as it
					were: if he should win, he was to obtain some
					service from the god: but if he should lose, he was
					to furnish a supper for the god at his own expense
					and provide a comely girl to spend the night with
					him. Thereupon he brought out the dice, and threw
					once for himself and once for the god, and lost.
					Abiding, therefore, by the terms of his challenge
					he prepared a somewhat sumptuous repast for the
					god and fetched Larentia, who openly practised the
					profession of courtesan. He feasted her, put her to
					bed in the temple, and, when he departed, locked the
					doors. The tale is told that the god visited her in
					the night, not in mortal wise, and bade her on the
					morrow go into the forum, and pay particular attention to the first man she met, and make him her
					friend. Larentia arose, therefore, and, going forth,
					met one of the wealthy men that were unwed and
					past their prime, whose name was Tarrutius. With
					this man she became acquainted, and while he lived
					she presided over his household, and when he died,
					she inherited his estate: and later, when she herself
					
					 
					
					died, she left her property to the State: and for that
					reason she has these honours.

Why do they call one of the gates the Window,
					for this is what fenestra means: and why is the so-called Chamber of Fortune beside it? 
				 
 Is it because King Servius, the luckiest of mortals,
					was reputed to have converse with Fortune, who
					visited him through a window?
				 
 Or is this but a fable, and is the true reason that
					when King Tarquinius Priscus died, his wife Tanaquil, a sensible and a queenly woman, put her head
					out of a window and, addressing the citizens, persuaded them to appoint Servius king, and thus the
					place came to have this name?

Why is it that of all the things dedicated to the
					gods it is the custom to allow only spoils of war to
					disintegrate with the passage of time, and not to
					move them beforehand nor repair them?
				 
 Is it in order that men may believe that their
					repute deserts them at the same time with the
					obliteration of their early memorials, and may ever
					seek to bring in some fresh reminder of valour?
				 
 Or is it rather that, as time makes dim the
					memorials of their dissension with their enemies, it
					would be invidious and malicious to restore and
					renew them? Nor among the Greeks, either, do
					
					 
					
					they that first erected a trophy of stone or of bronze 
					stand in good repute.

Why did Quintus Metellus, when he became
					 pontifex maximus , with his reputation for good sense
					in all other matters as well as in his statesmanship,
					prevent divination from birds after the month Sextius, which is now called August?
				 
 Is it that, even as we attend to such matters in the
					middle of the day or at dawn, or in the beginning
					of the month when the moon is waxing, and avoid
					the declining days and hours as unsuitable for
					business, so likewise did Metellus regard the period
					of time after the first eight months as the evening
					or late afternoon, so to speak, of the year, since
					then it is declining and waning?
				 
 Or is it because we should observe birds when they
					are in their prime and in perfect condition? And
					this they are before the summer-time: but towards
					autumn some are weak and sickly, others but nestlings and not full-grown, and still others have
					vanished completely, migrating because of the time
					of year.

Why were men who were not regularly enlisted, but merely tarrying m the camp, not allowed
					to throw missiles at the enemy or to wound them?
				 
 This fact Cato the Elder has made clear in one
					of his letters to his son, in which he bids the young
					man to return home if he has completed his term of
					service and has been discharged: or, if he should
					
					 
					
					stay over, to obtain permission from his general to
					wound or slay an enemy.
				 
 Is it because sheer necessity alone constitutes a
					warrant to kill a human being, and he who does
					so illegally and without the word of command is
					a murderer? For this reason Cyrus also praised
					Chrysantas who, when he was about to kill an
					enemy, and had his weapon raised to strike, heard
					the recall sounded and let the man go without striking him, believing that he was now prevented from
					so doing.
				 
 Or must he who grapples with the enemy and
					fights not be free from accountability nor go unscathed should he play the coward? For he does
					not help so much by hitting or wounding an enemy
					as he does harm by fleeing or retreating. He,
					therefore, who has been discharged from service is
					freed from military regulations: but he who asks
					leave to perform the offices of a soldier renders himself again accountable to the regulations and to his
					general.

Why is it not allowed the priest of Jupiter
					( Flamen Dialis ) to anoint himself in the open air? 
				 
 Is it because it used not to be proper or decent for
					sons to strip in their father's sight, nor a son-in-law
					in the presence of his father-in-law, nor in ancient
					days did they bathe together? Now Jupiter is
					our father, and whatever is in the open air is in some
					way thought to be particularly in his sight.
				 
 Or, just as it is against divine ordinance to strip oneself in a shrine or a temple, so also did they scrupulously avoid the open air and the space beneath the
					
					 
					
					heavens, since it was full of gods and spirits? Wherefore also we perform many necessary acts under a
					roof, hidden and concealed by our houses from the
					view of Divine powers.
				 
 Or are some regulations prescribed for the priest
					alone, while others are prescribed for all by the law
					through the priest? Wherefore also, in my country,
					to wear a garland, to wear the hair long, not to have
					any iron on one's person, and not to set foot within
					the boundaries of Phocis, are the special functions of
					an archon: but not to taste fruit before the autumnal
					equinox nor to prune a vine before the vernal equinox
					are prohibitions disclosed to practically all alike
					through the archon: for those are the proper seasons
					for each of these acts.
				 
 In the same way, then, it is apparently a special
					obligation of the Roman priest also not to use a horse
					nor to be absent from the city more than three nights 
					nor to lay aside the cap from which he derives the
					name of flamen . But many other regulations are
					revealed to all through the priest, and one of them is
					the prohibition not to anoint oneself in the open air.
					For the Romans used to be very suspicious of rubbing
					down with oil, and even to-day they believe that
					nothing has been so much to blame for the enslavement and effeminacy of the Greeks as their
					gymnasia and wrestling - schools, which engender
					much listless idleness and waste of time in their cities,
					as well as paederasty and the ruin of the bodies of
					
					 
					
					the young men with regulated sleeping, walking,
					rhythmical movements, and strict diet; by these
					practices they have unconsciously lapsed from the
					practice of arms, and have become content to be
					termed nimble athletes and handsome wrestlers
					rather than excellent men-at-arms and horsemen. It
					is hard work, at any rate, when men strip in the open
					air, to escape these consequences: but those who
					anoint themselves and care for their bodies in their
					own houses commit no offence.

Why did their ancient coinage have stamped
					on one side a double-faced likeness of Janus, on the
					other the stern or the prow of a ship? 
				 
 Is it, as many affirm, in honour of Saturn who
					crossed over to Italy in a ship?
				 
 Or, since this might be said of many, inasmuch as
					Janus, Evander, and Aeneas all landed in Italy after
					a voyage by sea, one might rather conjecture thus:
					some things are excellent for States, others are
					necessary; and of the excellent things good government is the chief, and of the necessary things facility
					of provision. Since, therefore, Janus established
					for them an ordered government by civilizing their
					life, and since the river, which was navigable and
					permitted transportation both from the sea and
					from the land, provided them with an abundance of
					necessities, the coinage came to have as its symbol
					the twofold form of the lawgiver, as has been
					stated, because of the change he wrought, and the
					vessel as symbol of the river.
				 
 They also used another kind of coinage, stamped
					
					 
					
					with the figures of a bull, a ram, and a boar, because
					their prosperity came mostly from their live stock,
					and from these they also derived their affluence.
					This is the reason why many of the names of the
					ancient families are such as the Suillii, Bubulci,
					Porcii, as Fenestella has stated.

Why do they use the temple of Saturn as the
					public treasury and also as a place of storage for
					records of contracts? 
				 
 Is it because the opinion and tradition prevailed
					that when Saturn was king there was no greed or
					injustice among men, but good faith and justice?
				 
 Or is it because the god was the discoverer of crops
					and the pioneer in husbandry? For this is what
					his sickle signifies and not as Antimachus, following
					Hesiod, has written:
					 
 Here with sickle in hand was wrought the form of rough
					Cronus
					 
 Maiming his sire at his side, who is Uranus, offspring of
					Acmon. 
 
					Now abundant harvests and their disposal are what
					give rise to a monetary system: therefore they make
					the god who is the cause of their good fortune its
					guardian also. Testimony to support this may be
					found in the fact that the markets held every eight
					days and called nundinae 
 are considered sacred to
					
					 
					
					Saturn, for it was the superabundance of the harvest
					that initiated buying and selling.
				 
 Or is this a matter of ancient history, and was
					Valerius Publicola the first to make the temple of
					Saturn the treasury, when the kings had been overthrown, because he believed that the place was
					well-protected, in plain sight, and hard to attack
					secretly?

Why do the ambassadors to Rome, from whatever country they come, proceed to the temple of
					Saturn, and register with the prefects of the treasury?
				 
 Is it because Saturn was a foreigner, and consequently takes pleasure in foreigners, or is the solution
					of this question also to be found in history? For it
					seems that in early days the treasurers used to send
					gifts to the ambassadors, which were called lautia , and
					they cared for the ambassadors when they were sick,
					and buried them at public expense if they died: but
					now, owing to the great number of embassies that
					come, this expensive practice has been discontinued:
					yet there still remains the preliminary meeting with
					the prefects of the treasury in the guise of registration.

Why may not the priest of Jupiter ( Flamen
					Dialis ) take an oath? 
				 
 Is it because an oath is a kind of test to prove that
					men are free-born, and neither the body nor the soul
					of the priest must be subjected to any test?
				 
 Or is it because it is unreasonable to distrust in
					trivial affairs him who is entrusted with holy matters
					of the greatest importance?
				 
 Or is it because every oath concludes with a curse
					
					 
					
					on perjury, and a curse is an ill-omened and gloomy
					thing? This is the reason why priests may not even
					invoke curses upon others. At any rate the priestess
					at Athens who was unwilling to curse Alcibiades at
					the people's bidding won general approval, for she
					declared that she had been made a priestess of prayer,
					not of cursing. 
				 
 Or is it because the danger of perjury is a public
					danger if an impious and perjured man leads in prayer
					and sacrifice on behalf of the State?

Why on the festival of the Veneralia do they
					pour out a great quantity of wine from the temple of
					Venus? 
				 
 Is it true, as most authorities affirm, that Mezentius,
					general of the Etruscans, sent to Aeneas and offered
					peace on condition of his receiving the year's vintage?
					But when Aeneas refused, Mezentius promised his
					Etruscans that when he had prevailed in battle, he
					would give them the wine. Aeneas learned of his
					promise and consecrated the wine to the gods, and
					after his victory he collected all the vintage and
					poured it out in front of the temple of Venus.
				 
 Or is this also symbolic, indicating that men should
					be sober and not drunken on festival days, since the
					gods take more pleasure in those who spill much
					strong drink than in those who imbibe it?

Why did the men of old keep the temple of
					Horta continually open?
				 
 Is it, as Antistius Labeo has stated, that since to
					
					 
					
					urge on is expressed by hortari , Horta is the goddess
					who urges us on, as it were, and incites us to noble
					actions: and thus they thought that, since she was
					ever active, she should never be procrastinating nor
					shut off by herself nor unemployed?
				 
 Or rather do they call her, as at present, Hora,
					with the first syllable lengthened, an attentive and
					very considerate goddess, who, since she was protective and thoughtful, they felt was never indifferent
					nor neglectful of human affairs?
				 
 Or is this too, like many other Latin words, a Greek
					word, and does it signify the supervising and
					guardian goddess? Hence her temple was continually open since she neither slumbers nor sleeps.
				 
 If, however, Labeo be right in pointing out that
					Hora is derived from 
 parorman 
 
 (to urge on), consider whether we must not declare that orator is
					thus to be derived, since an orator is a counsellor or
					popular leader who stimulates, as it were, and
					incites: and it is not to be derived from imprecating or praying ( orare ), as some assert.

Why did Romulus build the temple of Vulcan
					outside the city?
				 
 Was it in consequence of Vulcan's fabled jealousy
					of Mars because of Venus that Romulus, the reputed
					son of Mars, did not give Vulcan a share in his home
					or his city?
				 
 Or is this a foolish explanation, and was the temple
					originally built as a secret place of assembly and
					council-chamber for himself and his colleague Tatius,
					
					 
					
					that here they might convene with the senators and
					take counsel concerning public affairs in quiet without
					being disturbed?
				 
 Or was it that since Rome, from the very beginning,
					has been in great danger from conflagrations, they
					decided to show honour to this god, but to place his
					temple outside of the city?

Why is it that at the festival of the Consualia
					they place garlands on both the horses and the asses
					and allow them to rest?
				 
 Is it because they celebrate this festival in honour
					of Poseidon, god of horses, and the ass enjoys a
					share in the horse's exemption?
				 
 Or is it that since navigation and transport by sea
					have been discovered, pack animals have come to
					enjoy a certain measure of ease and rest?

Why was it the custom for those canvassing for
					office to do so in the toga without the tunic, as Cato
					has recorded? 
				 
 Was it in order that they might not carry money in
					the folds of their tunic and give bribes?
				 
 Or was it rather because they used to judge candidates worthy of office, not by their family nor their
					wealth nor their repute, but by their wounds and
					scars? Accordingly that these might be visible to
					those that encountered them, they used to go down
					to their canvassing without tunics.
				 
 Or were they trying to commend themselves to
					popular favour by thus humiliating themselves by
					their scanty attire, even as they do by hand-shaking,
					personal appeals, and fawning behaviour?

Why did the priest of Jupiter ( Flamen Dialis )
					resign his office if his wife died, as Ateius has
					recorded? 
				 
 Is it because the man who has taken a wife and
					then lost her is more unfortunate than one who has
					never taken a wife? For the house of the married
					man is complete, but the house of him who has
					married and later lost his wife is not only incomplete,
					but also crippled.
				 
 Or is it because the wife assists her husband in the
					rites, so that many of them cannot be performed
					without the wife's presence, and for a man who has
					lost his wife to marry again immediately is neither
					possible perhaps nor otherwise seemly? Wherefore
					it was formerly illegal for the flamen to divorce his
					wife: and it is still, as it seems, illegal, but in my day
					Domitian once permitted it on petition. The priests
					were present at that ceremony of divorce and performed many horrible, strange, and gloomy rites. 
				 
 One might be less surprised at this resignation of
					the flamen if one should adduce also the fact that
					when one of the censors died, the other was obliged
					to resign his office ; but when the censor Livius
					Drusus died, his colleague Aemilius Scaurus was unwilling to give up his office until certain tribunes
					ordered him to be led away to prison.

Why is a dog placed beside the Lares that men
					call by the special name of praestites , and why are the
					Lares themselves clad in dog-skins? 
				 
 Is it because those that stand before are termed
					
					 
					
 	 praestites , and, also because it is fitting that those who
					stand before a house should be its guardians, terrifying to strangers, but gentle and mild to the inmates,
					even as a dog is?
				 
 Or is the truth rather, as some Romans affirm, that,
					just as the philosophic school of Chrysippus think
					that evil spirits stalk about whom the gods use as
					executioners and avengers upon unholy and unjust
					men, even so the Lares are spirits of punishment
					like the Furies and supervisors of mens lives and
					houses? Wherefore they are clothed in the skins of
					dogs and have a dog as their attendant, in the belief
					that they are skilful in tracking down and following
					up evil-doers.

Why do they sacrifice a bitch to the goddess
					called Geneta Mana and pray that none of the
					household shall become good ?
				 
 Is it because Geneta is a spirit concerned with the
					generation and birth of beings that perish? Her
					name means some such thing as flux and birth or
					 flowing birth. 
 Accordingly, just as the Greeks
					sacrifice a bitch to Hecatê, even so do the Romans
					offer the same sacrifice to Geneta on behalf of the
					members of their household. But Socrates says that
					the Argives sacrifice a bitch to Eilioneia by reason of
					the ease with which the bitch brings forth its young.
					But does the import of the prayer, that none of them
					shall become good, refer not to the human members
					of a household, but to the dogs? For dogs should
					be savage and terrifying.
					
					 
					
				 
 Or, because of the fact that the dead are gracefully called the good, are they in veiled language
					asking in their prayer that none of their household
					may die? One should not be surprised at this: Aristotle, in fact, says that there is written in the treaty
					of the Arcadians with the Spartans: No one shall
						be made good for rendering aid to the Spartan party
						in Tegea : that is, no one shall be put to death.

Why do they even now, at the celebration of
					the Capitoline games, proclaim Sardians for sale! , 
					and why is an old man led forth in derision, wearing
					around his neck a child's amulet which they call a
					 bulla 
 ?
				 
 Is it because the Etruscans called Veians fought
					against Romulus for a long time, and he took this
					city last of all and sold at auction many captives
					together with their king, taunting him for his
					stupidity and folly? But since the Etruscans were
					originally Lydians, and Sardis was the capital city
					of the Lydians, they offered the Veians for sale under
					this name: and even to this day they preserve the
					custom in sport.

Why do they call the meat-markets macella 
					and macellae ?
				 
 Is this word corrupted from mageiroi (cooks)
					and has it prevailed, as many others have, by force
					of habit? For c and g have a close relationship in
					
					 
					
					Latin, and it was only after many years that they
					made use of g , which Spurius Carvilius introduced.
					And l , again, is substituted lispingly for r when
					people make a slip in the pronunciation of r because
					of the indistinctness of their enunciation.
				 
 Or must this problem also be solved by history?
					For the story goes that there once lived in Rome a
					violent man, a robber, Macellus by name, who despoiled many people and was with great difficulty
					caught and punished: from his wealth the public
					meat-market was built, and it acquired its name from
					him.

Why is it that on the Ides of January the
					flute-players are allowed to walk about the city
					wearing the raiment of women ?
				 
 Is it for the reason commonly alleged? They used
					to enjoy, as it seems, great honours, which King
					Numa had given them by reason of his piety towards
					the gods. Because they were later deprived of these
					honours by the decemviri , who were invested with
					consular power, they withdrew from the city. There
					was, accordingly, inquiry made for them, and a
					certain superstitious fear seized upon the priests
					when they sacrificed without flutes. But when the
					flute-players would not hearken to those sent to
					summon them to return, but remained in Tibur,
					a freedman secretly promised the officials to bring
					them back. On the pretext of having sacrificed to the
					gods, he prepared a sumptuous banquet and invited
					the flute-players. Women were present, as well
					as wine, and a party lasting all the night was
					being celebrated with merriment and dancing, when
					
					 
					
					suddenly the freedman interrupted, saying that
					his patron was coming to see him, and, in his perturbation, he persuaded the flute-players to climb
					into wagons, which were screened round about with
					skins, to be conveyed back to Tibur. But this was a
					trick, for he turned the wagons around, and, without
					being detected, since the flute-players comprehended
					nothing because of the wine and the darkness, at
					dawn he had brought them all to Rome. Now the
					majority of them happened to be clad in raiment of
					feminine finery because of the nocturnal drinking-bout: when, therefore, they had been persuaded and
					reconciled by the officials, it became their custom
					on that day to strut through the city clad in this
					manner.

Why are the matrons supposed to have
					founded the temple of Carmenta originally, and
					why do they reverence it now above all others?
				 
 There is a certain tale repeated that the women
					were prevented by the senate from using horse-drawn vehicles ; they therefore made an agreement with one another not to conceive nor to bear
					children, and they kept their husbands at a distance,
					until the husbands changed their minds and made
					the concession to them. When children were born
					to them, they, as mothers of a fair and numerous
					progeny, founded the temple of Carmenta.
				 
 Some assert that Carmenta was the mother of
					Evander and that she came to Italy: that her name
					was Themis, or, as others say, Nicostratê; and
					that because she chanted oracles in verse, she was
					named Carmenta by the Latins, for they call verses
					 carmina .
					
					 
					
				 
 But others think that Carmenta is a Fate, and that
					this is the reason why the matrons sacrifice to her.
					The true meaning of the name is deprived of
						sense, 
 by reason of her divine transports. Wherefore Carmenta was not so named from carmina , but
					rather carmina from her, because, in her divine frenzy,
					she chanted oracles in verse and metre.

Why do the women that sacrifice to Rumina
					pour milk over the offerings, but make no oblation of
					wine in the ceremony?
				 
 Is it because the Latins call the teat ruma , and
					assert that Ruminalis acquired its name inasmuch
					as the she-wolf offered its teat to Romulus? Therefore, as we call wet-nurses thelonai from thele (teat),
					even so Rumina is she that gives suck, the nurse
					and nurturer of children: she does not, therefore,
					welcome pure wine, since it is harmful for babes.

Why did they use to address some of the
					senators as Conscript Fathers, others merely as
					Fathers? 
				 
 Is it because they used to call those senators
					originally assigned to that body by Romulus fathers
					and patricians, that is to say well-born, since
					they could point out their fathers, while they
					called those who were later enrolled from the commoners conscript fathers?

Why did Hercules and the Muses have an
					altar in common?
				 
 Is it because Hercules taught Evander's people
					the use of letters, as Juba has recorded? And
					this action was held to be noble on the part of men
					who taught their friends and relatives. It was a
					long time before they began to teach for pay, and
					the first to open an elementary school was Spurius
					Carvilius, a freedman of the Carvilius who was
					the first to divorce his wife.

Why, when there are two altars of Hercules,
					do women receive no share nor taste of the sacrifices
					offered on the larger altar?
				 
 Is it because the friends of Carmenta carne late
					for the rites, as did also the dan of the Pinarii?
					Wherefore, as they were excluded from the banquet
					while the rest were feasting, they acquired the name
					 Pinarii (Starvelings). Or is it because of the fable
					of Deianeira and the shirt?

Why is it forbidden to mention or to inquire
					after or to call by name that deity, whether it be
					male or female, whose especial province it is to
					preserve and watch over Rome? This prohibition
					they connect with a superstition and relate that
					Valerius Soranus carne to an evil end because he
					revealed the name.
				 
 Is it because, as certain Roman writers have
					
					 
					
					recorded, there are certain evocations and enchantments affecting the gods, by which the Romans also
					believed that certain gods had been called forth 
					from their enemies, and had come to dwell among
					themselves, and they were afraid of having this
					same thing done to them by others? Accordingly,
					as the Tyrians are said to have put chains upon
					their images, and certain other peoples are said to
					demand sureties when they send forth their images
					for bathing or for some other rite of purification,
					so the Romans believed that not to mention and
					not to know the name of a god was the safest and
					surest way of shielding him.
				 
 Or as Homer has written,
					 Earth is yet common to all, 
					so that mankind should reverence and honour all the
					gods, since they possess the earth in common, even
					so did the Romans of early times conceal the identity
					of the god who was the guardian of their safety, since
					they desired that not only this god, but all the gods
					should be honoured by the citizens?

Why, among those called Fetiales , or, as we
					should say in Greek, peace-makers or treaty-bringers,
					was he who was called pater patratus considered the
 	chief? The pater patratus 
 is a man whose father is
					still alive and who has children; even now he possesses
					a certain preferment and confidence, for the praetors
					entrust to him any wards whose beauty and youth
					require a careful and discreet guardianship.
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because there attaches to these men respect
					for their children and reverence for their fathers?
				 
 Or does the name suggest the reason? For patratus 
					means, as it were, completed or perfected, since
					he to whose lot it has fallen to become a father while
					he still has a father is more perfect than other men.
				 
 Or should the man who presides over oaths and
					treaties of peace be, in the words of Homer, one
					 looking before and after ? Such a man above all
					others would be he that has a son to plan for and a
					father to plan with.

Why is the so-called rex sacrorum , that is to say
					 king of the sacred rites, forbidden to hold office or
					to address the people? 
				 
 Is it because in early times the kings performed the
					greater part of the most important rites, and themselves offered the sacrifices with the assistance of the
					priests? But when they did not practise moderation,
					but were arrogant and oppressive, most of the Greek
					states took away their authority, and left to them
					only the offering of sacrifice to the gods: but the
					Romans expelled their kings altogether, and to offer
					the sacrifices they appointed another, whom they did
					not allow to hold office or to address the people, so
					that in their sacred rites only they might seem to be
					subject to a king, and to tolerate a kingship only on
					the gods' account. At any rate, there is a sacrifice
					traditionally performed in the forum at the place
					called Comitium, and, when the rex has performed
					this, he flees from the forum as fast as he can.

Why did they not allow the table to be taken
					away empty, but insisted that something should be
					upon it? 
				 
 Was it that they were symbolizing the necessity of
					ever allowing some part of the present provision to
					remain over for the future, and to-day to be mindful
					of to-morrow, or did they think it polite to repress
					and restrain the appetite while the means of enjoyment was still at hand? For persons who have
					accustomed themselves to refrain from what they
					have are less likely to crave for what they have not.
				 
 Or does the custom also show a kindly feeling
					towards the servants? For they are not so well
					satisfied with taking as with partaking, since they
					believe that they thus in some manner share the
					table with their masters. 
				 
 Or should no sacred thing be suffered to be empty,
					and the table is a sacred thing?

Why does the husband approach his bride for
					the first time, not with a light, but in darkness?
				 
 Is it because he has a feeling of modest respect,
					since he regards her as not his own before his union
					with her? Or is he accustoming himself to approach
					even his own wife with modesty?
				 
 Or, as Solon has given directions that the bride
					shall nibble a quince before entering the bridal
					chamber, in order that the first greeting may not
					be disagreeable nor unpleasant, even so did the
					Roman legislator, if there was anything abnormal
					or disagreeable connected with the body, keep it
					concealed?
				 
 Or is this that is done a manner of casting infamy
					
					 
					
					upon unlawful amours, since even lawful love has a
					certain opprobrium connected with it?

Why is one of the hippodromes called
					Flaminian?
				 
 Is it because a certain Flaminius long ago
					bestowed some land upon the city and they used
					the revenues for the horse-races: and, as there was
					money still remaining, they made a road, and this
					they also called Flaminian?

Why do they call the rod-bearers lictors ? 
				 
 Is it because these officers used both to bind unruly
					persons and also to follow in the train of Romulus
					with straps in their bosoms? Most Romans use
					 alligare for the verb to bind, but purists, when
					they converse, say ligare . 
				 
 Or is the c but a recent insertion, and were they
					formerly called litores , that is, a class of public
					servants? The fact that even to this day the word
					 public is expressed by leitos in many of the Greek
					laws has escaped the attention of hardly anyone.

Why do the Luperci sacrifice a dog? The
					Luperci are men who race through the city on the
					Lupercalia, lightly clad in loin-cloths, striking those
					whom they meet with a strip of leather.
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because this performance constitutes a rite of
					purification of the city? In fact they call this month
					February, and indeed this very day, februata ; and
					to strike with a kind of leather thong they call
					 februare , the word meaning to purify. Nearly
					all the Greeks used a dog as the sacrificial victim
					for ceremonies of purification: and some, at least,
					make use of it even to this day. They bring
					forth for Hecatê puppies along with the other
					materials for purification, and rub round about with
					puppies such persons as are in need of cleansing,
					and this kind of purification they call periskylakismos 
					( puppifrication ).
				 
 Or is it that lupus means wolf and the Lupercalia
					is the Wolf Festival, and that the dog is hostile to
					the wolf, and for this reason is sacrificed at the Wolf
					Festival?
				 
 Or is it that the dogs bark at the Luperci and annoy
					them as they race about in the city?
				 
 Or is it that the sacrifice is made to Pan, and a dog
					is something dear to Pan because of his herds of
					goats?

Why on the festival called Septimontium 
					were they careful to refrain from the use of horsedrawn vehicles: and why even to this day are those
					who do not contemn ancient customs still careful
					about this? The festival Septimontium they observe in commemoration of the addition to the city
					of the seventh hill, by which Rome was made a city
					of seven hills.
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it, as some of the Roman writers conceive, because the city had not yet been completely joined
					together in all its parts?
				 
 Or has this nothing to do with Dionysus 
 ? But
					did they imagine, when their great task of consolidation had been accomplished, that the city had now
					ceased from further extension: and they rested
					themselves, and gave respite to the pack-animals,
					which had helped them in their labours, and afforded
					the animals an opportunity to enjoy the general
					festival with no work to do?
				 
 Or did they wish that the presence of the citizens
					should adorn and honour every festival always, and,
					above all, that one which was held in commemoration
					of the consolidation of the city? Wherefore in
					order that they might not leave the City, in whose
					honour the festival was being held, it was not permitted to make use of vehicles on that day.

Why do they call such persons as stand convicted of theft or of any other servile offences furciferi ? 
				 
 Is this also evidence of the carefulness of the men
					of old? For anyone who had found guilty of some
					knavery a slave reared in his own household used
					to command him to take up the forked stick, which
					they put under their carts, and to proceed through
					the community or the neighbourhood, observed of
					all observers, that they might distrust him and be
					on their guard against him in the future. This stick
					we call a prop, and the Romans furca ( fork ):
					
					 
					
					wherefore also he who has borne it about is called
					 furcifer ( fork-bearer ).

Why do they tie hay to one horn of vicious
					bulls to warn anyone who meets them to be on
					guard?
				 
 Is it because bulls, horses, asses, men, all wax
					wanton through stuffing and gorging? So Sophocles 
					has somewhere written,
					 
 You prance, as does a colt, from glut of food,
					 
 For both your belly and your cheeks are full. 
 
					Wherefore also the Romans used to say that Marcus
					Crassus had hay on his horn: for those who heckled
					the other chief men in the State were on their guard
					against assailing him, since they knew that he was
					vindictive and hard to cope with. Later, however,
					another saying was bandied about, that Caesar had
					pulled the hay from Crassus: for Caesar was the
					first to oppose Crassus in public policy and to treat
					him with contumely.

Why did they think that the priests that take
					omens from birds, whom they formerly called
					 Auspices , but now Augures , should always keep their
					lanterns open and put no cover on them?
				 
 Were they like the Pythagoreans, who made
					small matters symbols of great, forbidding men to
					sit on a peck measure or to poke a fire with a sword:
					and even so did the men of old make use of many
					riddles, especially with reference to priests: and is
					the question of the lantern of this sort? For the
					
					 
					
					lantern is like the body which encompasses the soul;
					the soul within is a light and the part of it that
					comprehends and thinks should be ever open and
					clear-sighted, and should never be closed nor remain
					unseen.
				 
 Now when the winds are blowing the birds are unsteady, and do not afford reliable signs because of
					their wandering and irregular movements. Therefore by this custom they instruct the augurs not to
					go forth to obtain these signs when the wind is
					blowing, but only in calm and still weather when
					they can use their lanterns open.

Why was it forbidden to priests that had any
					sore upon their bodies to sit and watch for birds of
					omen?
				 
 Is this also a symbolic indication that those who
					deal with matters divine should be in no way suffering from any smart, and should not, as it were, have
					any sore or affection in their souls, but should be untroubled, unscathed, and undistracted?
				 
 Or is it only logical, if no one would use for sacrifice a victim afflicted with a sore, or use such birds
					for augury, that they should be still more on their
					guard against such things in their own case, and be
					pure, unhurt, and sound when they advance to interpret signs from the gods? For a sore seems to
					be a sort of mutilation or pollution of the body.

Why did King Servius Tullius build a shrine of
					Little Fortune, which they call Brevis ? 
				 
 Is it because although, at the first, he was a man of
					little importance and of humble activities and the
					
					 
					
					son of a captive woman, yet, owing to Fortune, he
					became king of Rome? Or does this very change
					reveal the greatness rather than the littleness of
					Fortune, and does Servius beyond all other men
					seem to have deified the power of Fortune, and
					to have set her formally over all manner of actions?
					For he not only built shrines of Fortune the Giver
					of Good Hope, the Averter of Evil, the Gentle,
					the First-Born, and the Male: but there is also
					a shrine of Private Fortune, another of Attentive
					Fortune, and still another of Fortune the Virgin.
					Yet why need anyone review her other appellations,
					when there is a shrine of the Fowler's Fortune, or
					 Viscata , as they call her, signifying that we are caught
					by Fortune from afar and held fast by circumstances?
				 
 Consider, however, whether it be not that Servius
					observed the mighty potency of Fortune's ever
					slight mutation, and that by the occurrence or nonoccurrence of some slight thing, it has often fallen
					to the lot of some to succeed or to fail in the greatest
					enterprises, and it was for this reason that he built
					the shrine of Little Fortune, teaching men to give
					great heed to events, and not to despise anything that
					they encountered by reason of its triviality.

Why did they not extinguish a lamp, but
					suffered it to go out of itself? 
				 
 Did they reverence it as akin and closely related
					to the inextinguishable and undying fire, or is this
					also a symbolic indication that we should not destroy
					
					 
					
					nor do away with any living thing, if it does us no
					harm, since fire is like a living thing? For it needs
					sustenance, it moves of itself, and when it is extinguished it gives out a sound as if it were being
					slain.
				 
 Or does this custom teach us that we should not
					destroy fire, water, or any other necessity when we
					have enough and to spare, but should allow those
					who have need of these things to use them, and
					should leave them for others when we ourselves no
					longer have any use for them?

Why do they that are reputed to be of distinguished lineage wear crescents on their shoes? 
				 
 Is this, as Castor says, an emblem of the fabled
					residence in the moon, and an indication that after
					death their souls will again have the moon beneath
					their feet ; or was this the special privilege of the
					most ancient families? These were Arcadians of
					Evander's following, the so-called Pre-Lunar people.
				 
 Or does this also, like many another custom,
					remind the exalted and proud of the mutability,
					for better or worse, in the affairs of men, and that
					they should take the moon as an illustration :
					 
 When out of darkness first she comes anew
					 
 Her face she shows increasing fair and full;
					 
 And when she reaches once her brightest sheen,
					 
 Again she wastes away and comes to naught? 
 
					
					 
					
				 
 Or was it a lesson in obedience to authority,
					teaching them not to be disaffected under the government of kings, but to be even as the moon, who is
					willing to give heed to her superior and to be a second
					to him,
					 Ever gazing in awe at the rays of the bright-gleaming
					Sun-god, 
					as Parmenides puts it; and were they thus to be
					content with their second placeo living under their
					ruler, and enjoying the power and honour derived
					from him?

Why do they believe that the year belongs to
					Jupiter, but the months to Juno?
				 
 Is it because Jupiter and Juno rule the invisible,
					conceptual deities, but the sun and moon the visible
					deities? Now the sun makes the year and the moon
					the months: but one must not believe that the sun
					and moon are merely images of Jupiter and Juno, but
					that the sun is really Jupiter himself in his material
					form and in the same way the moon is Juno. This
					is the reason why the Romans apply the name Juno
					to our Hera, for the name means young or junior, 
					so named from the moon. And they also call her
					Lucina, that is brilliant or light-giving : and they
					believe that she aids women in the pangs of childbirth, even as the moon :
					 
 On through the dark-blue vault of the stars,
					 
 Through the moon that brings birth quickly; 
 
					for women are thought to have easiest travail at the
					time of the full moon.

Why of birds is the one called left-hand a
					bird of good omen?
				 
 Is this not really true, but is it the peculiarity of the
					language which throws many off the track? For
					their word for left is sinistrum ; to permit is
					 sinere : and they say sine when they urge giving
					permission. Accordingly the bird which permits the
					augural action to be taken, that is, the avis sinisteria ,
					the vulgar are not correct in assuming to be sinistra 
					and in calling it so.
				 
 Or is it, as Dionysius says, that when Ascanius,
					son of Aeneas, was drawing up his army against
					Mezentius, and his men were taking the auspices, a
					flash of lightning, which portended victory, appeared
					on the left, and from that time on they observe this
					practice in divination? Or is it true, as certain other
					authorities affirm, that this happened to Aeneas?
					As a matter of fact, the Thebans, when they had
					routed and overpowered their enemies on the left
					wing at Leuctra, continued thereafter to assign to
					the left the chief command in all battles.
				 
 Or is it rather, as Juba declares, that as anyone
					looks eastward, the north is on the left, and some
					make out the north to be the right, or upper, side of
					the universe?
				 
 But consider whether it be not that the left is by
					nature the weaker side, and they that preside over
					auguries try to strengthen and prop its deficient
					powers by this method of equalization.
					
					 
					
				 
 Or was it that they believed earthly and mortal
					matters to be antithetical to things heavenly and
					divine, and so thought that whatever was on the left
					for us the gods were sending forth from the right?

Why was it permitted to take up a bone of a
					man who had enjoyed a triumph, and had later died
					and been cremated, and carry it into the city and
					deposit it there, as Pyrrhon of Lipara has recorded?
				 
 Was it to show honour to the dead? In fact, to
					other men of achievement, as well as to generals,
					they granted, not only for themselves, but also for their
					descendants, the right to be buried in the Forum, as
					they did to Valerius and to Fabricius: and they
					relate that when descendants of these men die and
					have been conveyed to the Forum, a lighted torch
					is placed beneath the body and then immediately
					withdrawn; thus they enjoy the honour without
					exciting envy, and merely confirm their prerogative.

Why was it that when they gave a public
					banquet for men who had celebrated a triumph, they
					formally invited the consuls and then sent word to
					them requesting them not to come to the dinner? 
				 
 Was it because it was imperative that the place of
					honour at table and an escort home after dinner
					should be assigned to the man who had triumphed?
					But these honours can be given to no one else when
					the consuls are present, but only to them.

Why does not the tribune wear a garment with
					the purple border, although the other magistrates
					wear it?
				 
 Is it because he is not a magistrate at all? For
					tribunes have no lictore, nor do they transact business
					
					 
					
					seated on the curule chair, nor do they enter their
					office at the beginning of the year as all the other
					magistrates do, nor do they cease from their functions
					when a dictator is chosen: but although he transfers
					every other office to himself, the tribunes alone
					remain, as not being officials but as holding some
					other position. Even as some advocates will not have
					it that a demurrer is a suit, but hold that its effect is
					the opposite of that of a suit; for a suit brings a case
					into court and obtains a judgement, while a demurrer
					takes it out of court and quashes it; in the same
					way they believe that the tribuneship is a check
					on officialdom and a position to offer opposition
					to magistracy rather than a magistracy. For its
					authority and power consist in blocking the power
					of a magistrate and in the abrogation of excessive
					authority.
				 
 Or one might expound these matters and others
					like them, if one were to indulge in the faculty of
					invention: but since the tribunate derives its origin
					from the people, the popular element in it is strong:
					and of much importance is the fact that the tribune
					does not pride himself above the rest of the people,
					but conforms in appearance, dress, and manner of
					life to ordinary citizens. Pomp and circumstance
					become the consul and the praetor: but the tribune,
					as Gaius Curio used to say, must allow himself to be
					trodden upon: he must not be proud of mien, nor
					difficult of access nor harsh to the multitude, but
					indefatigable on behalf of others and easy for the
					multitude to deal with. Wherefore it is the custom
					that not even the door of his house shall be closed, but
					it remains open both night and day as a haven of
					refuge for such as need it. The more humble he is
					
					 
					
					in outward appearance, the more is he increased in
					power. They think it meet that he shall be available
					for the common need and be accessible to all, even
					as an altar: and by the honour paid to him they make
					his person holy, sacred, and inviolable. Wherefore if
					anything happen to him when he walks abroad in
					public, it is even customary for him to cleanse and
					purify his body as if it had been polluted.

Why are the rods of the praetors carried in
					bundles with axes attached?
				 
 Is it because this is a symbolic indication that the
					temper of the official should not be too quick or
					unrestrained? Or does the deliberate unfastening of
					the rods, which creates delay and postponement of
					his iit of temper, oftentimes cause him to change his
					mind about the punishment? Now since some badness is curable, but other badness is past remedy, the
					rods correct that which may be amended and the
					axes cut off the incorrigible.

When the Romans learned that the people called
					Bletonesii, a barbarian tribe, had sacrificed a man to
					the gods, why did they send for the tribal rulers with
					intent to punish them, but, when it was made plain
					that they had done thus in accordance with a certain
					custom, why did the Romans set them at liberty, but
					forbid the practice for the future? Yet they themselves, not many years before, had buried alive two
					men and two women, two of them Greeks, two Gauls,
					in the place called the Forum Boarium. It certainly
					
					 
					
					seems strange that they themselves should do this,
					and yet rebuke barbarians on the ground that they
					were acting with impiety.
				 
 Did they think it impious to sacrifice men to the
					gods, but necessary to sacrifice them to the spirits?
					Or did they believe that men who did this by tradition
					and custom were sinning, whereas they themselves
					did it by command of the Sibylline books? For the
					tale is told that a certain maiden, Helvia, was struck
					by lightning while she was riding on horseback, and
					her horse was found lying stripped of its trappings:
					and she herself was naked, for her tunic had been
					pulled far up as if purposely: and her shoes, her
					rings, and her head-dress were scattered apart here
					and there, and her open mouth allowed the tongue to
					protrude. The soothsayers declared that it was a
					terrible disgrace for the Vestal Virgins, that it would
					be bruited far and wide, and that some wanton
					outrage would be found touching the knights also.
					Thereupon a barbarian slave of a certain knight gave
					information against three Vestal Virgins, Aemilia,
					Licinia, and Marcia, that they had all been corrupted
					at about the same time, and that they had long
					entertained lovers, one of whom was Vetutius Barrus, 
					the informer's master. The Vestals, accordingly,
					were convicted and punished: but, since the deed
					was plainly atrocious, it was resolved that the priests
					should consult the Sibylline books. They say that
					oracles were found foretelling that these events
					would come to pass for the bane of the Romans, and
					enjoining on them that, to avert the impending
					disaster, they should offer as a sacrifice to certain
					
					 
					
					strange and alien spirits two Greeks and two Gauls,
					buried alive on the spot.

Why do they reckon the beginning of the day
					from midnight? 
				 
 Is it because the Roman State was based originally
					on a military organization and most of the matters
					that are of use on campaigns are taken up beforehand
					at night? Or did they make sunrise the beginning
					of activity, and night the beginning of preparation?
					For men should be prepared when they act, and not
					be making their preparations during the action, as
					Myson, who was fashioning a grain-fork in wintertime, is reported to have remarked to Chilon the
					Wise.
				 
 Or, just as noon is for most people the end of their
					transaction of public or serious business, even so did
					it seem good to make midnight the beginning? A
					weighty testimony to this is the fact that a Roman
					official does not make treaties or agreements after
					midday.
				 
 Or is it impossible to reckon the beginning and end
					of the day by sunset and sunrise? For if we follow
					the method by which most people formulate their
					definitions, by their perceptions, reckoning the first
					peep of the sun above the horizon as the beginning of
					day, and the cutting off of its last rays as the beginning of night, we shall have no equinox: but that
					night which we think is most nearly equal to the day
					will plainly be less than that day by the diameter of
					
					 
					
					the sun. But then again the remedy which the
					mathematicians apply to this anomaly, decreeing that
					the instant when the centre of the sun touches the
					horizon is the boundary between day and night, is a
					negation of plain fact; for the result will be that when
					there is still much light over the earth and the sun is
					shining upon us, we cannot admit that it is day, but
					must say that it is already night. Since, therefore, the
					beginning of day and night is difficult to determine at
					the time of the risings and settings of the sun because
					of the irrationalities which I have mentioned, there
					is left the zenith or the nadir of the suii to reckon as
					the beginning. The second is better; for from noon
					on the sun's course is away from us to its setting, but
					from midnight on its course is towards us to its rising.

Why in the early days did they not allow their
					wives to grind grain or to cook? 
				 
 Was it in memory of the treaty which they made
					with the Sabines? For when they had carried off
					the Sabines' daughters, and later, after warring with
					the Sabines, had made peace, it was specified among
					the other articles of agreement that no Sabine woman
					should grind grain for a Roman or cook for him.

Why do men not marry during the month of
					May? 
				 
 Is it because this month comes between April and
					June, of which they regard April as sacred to Venus
					and June as sacred to Juno, both of them divinities
					of marriage: and so they put the wedding a little
					earlier or wait until later?
					
					 
					
				 
 Or is it because in this month they hold their most
					important ceremony of purification, in which they
					now throw images from the bridge into the river, 
					but in days of old they used to throw human beings?
					Wherefore it is the custom that the Flaminica, reputed to be consecrate to Juno, shall wear a stern
					face, and refrain from bathing and wearing ornaments at this time.
				 
 Or is it because many of the Latins make offerings
					to the departed in this month? And it is for this
					reason, perhaps, that they worship Mercury in this
					month and that the month derives its name from
					Maia. 
				 
 Or is May, as some relate, named after the older
					( maior ) and June after the younger generation
					( iunior )? For youth is better fitted for marriage,
					as Euripides also says:
					 
 Old age bids Love to take her leave for aye
					 
 And Aphrodite wearies of the old. 
 
					They do not, therefore, marry in May, but wait for
					June which comes next after May.

Why do they part the hair of brides with the
					point of a spear? 
				 
 Does this symbolize the marriage of the first
					Roman wives by violence with attendant war, or do
					the wives thus learn, now that they are mated to
					brave and warlike men, to welcome an unaffected,
					unfeminine, and simple mode of beautification?
					Even as Lycurgus, by giving orders to make the
					
					 
					
					doors and roofs of houses with the saw and the axe
					only, and to use absolutely no other tool, banished
					all over-refinement and extravagance.
				 
 Or does this procedure hint at the manner of their
					separation, that with steel alone can their marriage
					be dissolved?
				 
 Or is it that most of the marriage customs were
					connected with Juno? Now the spear is commonly
					held to be sacred to Juno, and most of her statues
					represent her leaning on a spear, and the goddess
					herself is surnamed Quirite ; for the men of old
					used to call the spear curis ; wherefore they further
					relate that Enyalius is called Quirinus by the Romans.

Why do they call the money expended upon
					public spectacles Lucar ?
				 
 Is it because round about the city there are, consecrated to gods, many groves which they call luci , and
					they used to spend the revenue from these on the
					public spectacles?

Why do they call the Quirinalia the Feast of
					Fools? 
				 
 Is it because, as Juba states, they apportioned
					that day to men who did not know their own kith and
					kin? Or was it granted to those who, because of
					some business, or absence from Rome, or ignorance,
					had not sacrificed with the rest of their tribe on the
					Fornacalia, that, on this day, they might take their
					due enjoyment of that festival?

Why is it that, when the sacrifice to Hercules
					takes place, they mention by name no other god, and
					why is a dog never seen within his enclosure, as
					Varro has recorded?
				 
 Do they make mention of no other god because
					they regard Hercules as a demigod? But, as some 
					relate, even while he was still on earth, Evander
					erected an altar to him and brought him sacrifice.
					And of all animals he contended most with a dog,
					for it is a fact that this beast always gave him much
					trouble, Cerberus, for instance. And, to crown all,
					when Oeonus, Licymnius's son, had been murdered by
					the sons of Hippocoön because of a dog, Hercules
					was compelled to engage in battle with them, and
					lost many of his friends and his brother Iphicles.

Why was it not permitted the patricians to
					dwell about the Capitoline?
				 
 Was it because Marcus Manlius, while he was
					dwelling there, tried to make himself king? They
					say that because of him the house of Manlius was
					bound by an oath that none of them should ever bear
					the name of Marcus.
				 
 Or does this fear date from early times? At any
					rate, although Publicola was a most democratic
					man, the nobles did not cease traducing him nor the
					commoners fearing him, until he himself razed his
					house, the situation of which was thought to be a
					threat to the Forum.

Why do they give a chaplet of oak leaves to
					the man who has saved the life of a citizen in time of
					war? 
				 
 Is it because it is easy to find an abundance of oak
					leaves everywhere on a campaign?
				 
 Or is it because the chaplet is sacred to Jupiter
					and Juno, whom they regard as guardians of the
					city?
				 
 Or is the custom an ancient inheritance from the
					Arcadians, who have a certain kinship with the oak?
					For they are thought to have been the first men
					sprung from the earth, even as the oak was the first
					plant.

Why do they make most use of vultures in
					augury?
				 
 Is it because twelve vultures appeared to Romulus
					at the time of the founding of Rome? Or is it
					because this is the least frequent and familiar of
					birds? For it is not easy to find a vulture's nest, but
					these birds suddenly swoop down from afar; wherefore the sight of them is portentous.
				 
 Or did they learn this also from Hercules? If
					Herodorus tells the truth, Hercules delighted in
					the appearance of vultures beyond that of all other
					birds at the beginning of any undertaking, since he
					believed that the vulture was the most righteous
					of all flesh-eating creatures: for, in the first place,
					it touches no living thing, nor does it kill any animate
					creature, as do eagles and hawks and the birds that
					fly by night: but it lives upon that which has been
					killed in some other way. Then again, even of these
					
					 
					
					it leaves its own kind untouched: for no one has ever
					seen a vulture feeding on a bird, as eagles and hawks
					do, pursuing and striking their own kind particularly. And yet, as Aeschylus says,
					 How can a bird that feeds on birds be pure? 
					And we may say that it is the most harmless of birds
					to men, since it neither destroys any fruit or plant
					nor injures any domesticated animal. But if, as the
					Egyptians fable, the whole species is female, and
					they conceive by receiving the breath of the East
					Wind, even as the trees do by receiving the West
					Wind, then it is credible that the signs from them
					are altogether unwavering and certain. But in the
					case of the other birds, their excitements in the
					mating season, as well as their abductions, retreats,
					and pursuits, have much that is disturbing and unsteady.

Why is the shrine of Aesculapius outside the
					city?
				 
 Is it because they considered it more healthful to
					spend their time outside the city than within its
					walls? In fact the Greeks, as might be expected,
					have their shrines of Asclepius situated in places
					which are both clean and high.
				 
 Or is it because they believe that the god carne
					at their summons from Epidaurus, and the Epidauria. have their shrine of Asclepius not in the
					city, but at some distance?
				 
 Or is it because the serpent carne out from the
					trireme into the island, and there disappeared, and
					thus they thought that the god himself was indicating
					to them the site for building?

Why is it the customary rule that those who are
					practising holy living must abstain from legumes? 
				 
 Did they, like the followers of Pythagoras, religiously abstain from beans for the reasons which are
					commonly offered, and from vetch and chickpea,
					because their names ( lathyros and erebinthos ) suggest
					Lethê and Erebus?
				 
 Or is it because they make particular use of
					legumes for funeral feasts and invocations of the
					dead?
				 
 Or is it rather because one must keep the body
					clean and light for purposes of holy living and lustration? Now legumes are a flatulent food and produce surplus matter that requires much purgation.
				 
 Or is it because the windy and flatulent quality
					of the food stimulates desire?

Why do they inflict no other punishment on
					those of the Holy Maidens who have been seduced,
					but bury them alive? 
				 
 Is it because they cremate their dead, and to use
					fire in the burial of a woman who had not guarded
					the holy fire in purity was not right?
				 
 Or did they believe it to be against divine ordinance to annihilate a body that had been consecrated
					by the greatest of lustra! ceremonies, or to lay hands
					upon a holy woman? Accordingly they devised that
					she should die of herself; they conducted her
					underground into a chamber built there, in which
					had been placed a lighted lamp, a loaf of bread,
					
					 
					
					and some milk and water. Thereafter they covered
					over the top of the chamber with earth. And yet not
					even by this manner of avoiding the guilt have they
					escaped their superstitious fear, but even to this day
					the priests proceed to this place and make offerings
					to the dead.

Why is it that after the chariot-race on the
					Ides of December the right-hand trace-horse of
					the winning team is sacrificed to Mars, and then someone cuts off its tail, and carries it to the place called
					Regia and sprinkles its blood on the altar, while some
					come down from the street called the Via Sacra, and
					some from the Subura, and fight for its head?
				 
 Is it, as some say, that they believe Troy to have
					been taken by means of a horse: and therefore they
					punish it, since, forsooth, they are
					 Noble scions of Trojans commingled with children of Latins. 
 
				 
 Or is it because the horse is a spirited, warlike, and
					martial beast, and they sacrifice to the gods creatures
					that are particularly pleasing and appropriate for
					them: and the winner is sacrificed because Mars is
					the specific divinity of victory and prowess?
				 
 Or is it rather because the work of the god demands standing firm, and men that hold their ground
					defeat those that do not hold it, but flee? And is
					swiftness punished as being the coward's resource,
					and do they learn symbolically that there is no
					safety for those who flee?

Why do the censors, when they take office, do
					nothing else before they contract for the food of the
					sacred geese and the polishing of the statue? 
				 
 Is it that they begin with the most trivial things,
					matters that require little expense or trouble?
				 
 Or is this a commemoration of an old debt of
					gratitude owed to these creatures for their services
					in the Gallic wars? For when in the night the
					barbarians were already climbing over the rampart
					of the Capitol, the gee se perceived the invaders, although the dogs were asleep, and waked the guards
					by their clamour.
				 
 Or is it because the censors are guardians of the
					most important matters, and, since it is their duty to
					oversee and to busy themselves with sacred and State
					affairs and with the lives, morals, and conduct of the
					people, they immediately take into account the most
					vigilant of creatures, and at the same time by their
					care of the geese they urge the citizens not to be
					careless or indifferent about sacred matters?
				 
 But the polishing of the statue is absolutely necessary: for the red pigment, with which they used to
					tint ancient statues, rapidly loses its freshness.

Why is it that, if any one of the other priests is
					condemned and exiled, they depose him and elect
					another, but the augur, as long as he lives, even if
					they find him guilty of the worst offences, they do not
					
					 
					
					deprive of his priesthood? They call augurs the
					men who are in charge of the omens.
				 
 Is it, as some say, because they wish no one who is
					not a priest to know the secrets of the holy rites?
				 
 Or, because the augur is bound by oaths to reveal
					the sacred matters to no one, are they unwilling to
					release him from his oath as would be the case if he
					had been reduced to private status?
				 
 Or is augur a name denoting, not a rank or
					office, but knowledge and skill? Then to prevent a
					soothsayer from being a soothsayer would be like
					voting that a musician shall not be a musician, nor a
					physician a physician: for they cannot deprive him
					of his ability, even if they take away his title. They
					naturally appoint no successor since they keep the
					original number of augurs.

Why is it that on the Ides of August, formerly
					called Sextilis, all the slaves, female and male, keep
					holiday, and the Roman women make a particular
					practice of washing and cleansing their heads?
				 
 Do the servants have release from work because on
					this day King Servius was born from a captive maid-servant? And did the washing of their heads begin
					with the slave-women, because of their holiday, and
					extend itself to free-born women?

Why do they adorn their children's necks
					with amulets which they call bullae ? 
				 
 Was it, like many another thing, in honour of their
					
					 
					
					wives, who had been made theirs by force, that they
					voted this also as a traditional ornament for the
					children born from them?
				 
 Or is it to honour the manly courage of Tarquin?
					For the tale is told that, while he was still but a boy,
					in the battle against the combined Latin and Etruscan
					forces he charged straight into the enemy; and although he was thrown from his horse, he boldly withstood those that hurled themselves upon him, and
					thus gave renewed strength to the Romans. A
					brilliant rout of the enemy followed, sixteen thousand
					were killed, and he received this amulet as a prize of
					valour from his father the king.
				 
 Or did the Romans of early times account it not
					disreputable nor disgraceful to love male slaves in the
					flower of youth, as even now their comedies testify,
					but they strictly refrained from boys of free birth; and
					that they might not be in any uncertainty, even when
					they encountered them unclad, did the boys wear this
					badge?
				 
 Or is this a safeguard to insure orderly conduct, a
					sort of bridle on incontinence, that they may be
					ashamed to pose as men before they have put off
					the badge of childhood?
				 
 What Varro and his school say is not credible: that
					since boulê (counsel) is called bolla by the Aeolians,
					the boys put on this ornament as a symbol of good
					counsel.
				 
 But consider whether they may not wear it because
					of the moon. For the visible shape of the moon at
					the first quarter is not like a sphere, but like a lentil-seed
					
					 
					
					or a quoit; and, as Empedocles thinks, so also
					is the matter of which the moon is composed.

Why do they name boys when they are nine
					days old, but girls when they are eight days old?
				 
 Does the precedence of the girls have Nature as its
					cause? It is a fact that the female grows up, and
					attains maturity and perfection before the male. As
					for the days, they take those that follow the seventh:
					for the seventh is dangerous for newly-born children
					in various ways and in the matter of the umbilical
					cord: for in most cases this comes away on the
					seventh day: but until it comes off, the child is more
					like a plant than an animal. 
				 
 Or did they, like the adherents of Pythagoras,
					regard the even number as female and the odd
					number as male? For the odd number is generative, and, when it is added to the even number, it
					prevails over it. And also, when they are divided
					into units, the even number, like the female, yields
					a vacant space between, while of the odd number an
					integral part always remains. Wherefore they think
					that the odd is suitable for the male, and the even for
					the female.
				 
 Or is it that of all numbers nine is the first square
					from the odd and perfect triad, while eight is the
					first cube from the even dyad? Now a man should be
					four-square, eminent, and perfect; but a woman,
					like a cube, should be stable, domestic, and difficult
					to remove from her place. And this should be added,
					
					 
					
					that eight is the cube of two arid nine the square of
					three: women have two names, men have three.

Why do they call children of unknown fathers
					 spurii ? 
				 
 Now the reason is not, as the Greeks believe and
					lawyers in court are wont to assert, that these
					children are begotten of some promiscuous and
					common seed: but Spurius is a first name like Sextus
					and Decimus and Gaius. They do not write first
					names in full, but by one letter, as Titus (T.) and
					Lucius (L.) and Marcus (M.): or by two, as Tiberius
					(Ti.) and Gnaeus (Cn.): or by three, as Sextus (Sex.)
					and Servius (Ser.). Spurius, then, is one of those
					written by two letters: Sp. And by these two
					letters they also denote children of unknown fathers,
					 sine patre , that is without a father : by the s they
					indicate sine and by the p patre . This, then, caused
					the error, the writing of the same abbreviation for
					 sine patre and for Spurius.
				 
 I must state the other explanation also, but it is
					somewhat absurd: They assert that the Sabines
					use the word spurius for the pudenda muliebria , and it
					later came about that they called the child born of
					an unmarried, unespoused woman by this name, as
					if in mockery.

Why do they call Bacchus Liber Pater ( Free
					Father )? 
					
					 
					
				 
 Is it because he is the father of freedom to drinkers?
					For most people become bold and are abounding in
					frank speech when they are in their cups. Or is
					it because he has provided the means for libations?
				 
 Or is it derived, as Alexander asserts, from Dionysus
					Eleuthereus, so named from Eleutherae in Boeotia?

For what reason is it not the custom for
					maidens to marry on public holidays, but widows do
					marry at this time? 
				 
 Is it, as Varro has remarked, that maidens are
					grieved over marrying, but older women are glad,
					and on a holiday one should do nothing in grief or
					by constraint?
				 
 Or is it rather because it is seemly that not a few
					should be present when maidens marry, but disgraceful that many should be present when widows
					marry? Now the first marriage is enviable: but
					the second is to be deprecated, for women are
					ashamed if they take a second husband while the
					first husband is still living, and they feel sad if they
					do so when he is dead. Wherefore they rejoice
					in a quiet wedding rather than in noise and processions. Holidays distract most people, so that they
					have no leisure for such matters.
				 
 Or, because they seized the maiden daughters of
					the Sabines at a holiday festival, and thereby became involved in war, did they come to regard it as
					ill-omened to marry maidens on holy days?

Why do the Romans reverence Fortuna
					Primigenia, or First-born, as one might translate it?
				 
 Is it because by Fortune, as they say, it befell
					Servius, born of a maidservant, to become a famous
					king of Rome? This is the assumption which the
					majority of Romans make.
				 
 Or is it rather because Fortune supplied the origin
					and birth of Rome? 
				 
 Or does the matter have an explanation more
					natural and philosophic, which assumes that Fortune
					is the origin of everything, and Nature acquires its
					solid frame by the operation of Fortune, whenever
					order is created in any store of matter gathered
					together at haphazard.

Why do the Romans call the Dionysiac
					artists 
 histriones 
 ?
				 
 Is it for the reason that Cluvius Rufus has recorded? For he states that in very ancient times,
					in the consulship of Gaius Sulpicius and Licinius
					Stolo, a pestilential disease arose in Rome and
					destroyed to a man all persons appearing on the
					stage. Accordingly, at the request of the Romans,
					there came many excellent artists from Etruria, of
					whom the first in repute and the one who for the
					longest time enjoyed success in their theatres, was
					named Hister: and therefore ali actors are named
					 histriones from him.

Why do they not marry women who are
					closely akin to them?
				 
 Do they wish to enlarge their relationships by
					marriage and to acquire many additional kinsmen
					by bestowing wives upon others and receiving wives
					from others?
				 
 Or do they fear the disagreements which arise
					in marriages of near kin, on the ground that these
					tend to destroy natural rights?
				 
 Or, since they observed that women by reason of
					their weakness need many protectors, were they
					not willing to take as partners in their household
					women closely akin to them, so that if their husbands
					wronged them, their kinsmen might bring them
					succour?

Why was it not permitted for the priest of
					Jupiter, whom they call the Flamen Dialis , to touch
					either flour or yeast? 
				 
 Is it because flour is an incomplete and crude
					food? For neither has it remained what it was,
					wheat, nor has it become what it must become,
					bread; but it has both lost the germinative power
					of the seed and at the same time it has not attained
					to the usefulness of food. Wherefore also the Poet
					by a metaphor applied to barley-meal the epithet
					 mylephatosas , if it were being killed or destroyed
					in the grinding.
				 
 Yeast is itself also the product of corruption, and
					produces corruption in the dough with which it is
					mixed: for the dough becomes flabby and inert,
					and altogether the process of leavening seems to
					be one of putrefaction ; at any rate if it goes too
					far, it completely sours and spoils the flour.

Why is this priest also forbidden to touch raw
					flesh?
				 
 Is this custom intended to deter people completely
					from eating raw meat, or do they scrupulously repudiate flesh for the same reason as flour? For neither
					is it a living creature nor has it yet become a cooked
					food. Now boiling or roasting, being a sort of alteration and mutation, eliminates, the previous form;
					but fresh raw meat does not have a clean and unsullied appearance, but one that is repulsive, like
					a fresh wound.

Why did they bid the priest avoid the dog
					and the goat, neither touching them nor naming
					them?
				 
 Did they loathe the goat's lasciviousness and foul
					odour, or did they fear its susceptibility to disease?
					For it is thought to be subject to epilepsy beyond all
					other animals, and to infect persons who eat it 
					or touch it when it is possessed of the disease. The
					reason, they say, is the narrowness of the air passages, which are often suddenly contracted; this they
					deduce from the thinness of its voice. So also in the
					case of men, if they chance to speak during an epileptic fit, the sound they make is very like a bleat.
				 
 The dog has, perhaps, less of lasciviousness and
					foul odour. Some, however, assert that a dog may not
					enter either the Athenian acropolis or the island of
					Delos because of its open mating, as if cattle and
					swine and horses mated within the walls of a chamber
					
					 
					
					and not openly and without restraint! For these
					persons are ignorant of the true reason: because
					the dog is a belligerent creature they exclude it
					from inviolable arid holy shrines, thereby offering a
					safe place of refuge for suppliants. Accordingly it
					is likely that the priest of Jupiter also, since he
					is, as it were, the animate embodiment and sacred
					image of the god, should be left free as a refuge
					for petitioners and suppliants, with no one to hinder
					them or to frighten them away. For this reason his
					couch was placed in the vestibule of his house, and
					anyone who fell at his knees had immunity from beating or chastisement all that day: and if any prisoner
					succeeded in reaching the priest, he was set free,
					and his chains they threw outside, not by the doors,
					but over the roof. So it would have been of no
					avail for him to render himself so gentle and humane,
					if a dog had stood before him frightening and keeping away those who had need of a place of refuge.
				 
 Nor, in fact, did the men of old think that this
					animal was wholly pure, for it was never sacrificed to
					any of the Olympian gods: and when it is sent to the
					cross-roads as a supper for the earth-goddess Hecatê, 
					it has its due portion among sacrifices that avert and
					expiate evil. In Sparta they immolate puppies to the
					bloodiest of the gods, Enyalius: and in Boeotia the
					ceremony of public purification is to pass between
					the parts of a dog which has been cut in twain. The
					Romans themselves, in the month of purification, at
					the Wolf Festival, which they call the Lupercalia,
					sacrifice a dog. Hence it is not out of keeping that
					those who have attained to the office of serving the
					
					 
					
					highest and purest god should be forbidden to make
					a dog their familiar companion and housemate.

For what reason was it forbidden the priest of
					Jupiter to touch ivy or to pass along a road overhung
					by a vine growing on a tree? 
				 
 Is this second question like the precepts: Do not
					eat seated on a stool, 
 Do not sit on a peck measure, 
					 Do not step over a broom ? For the followers of
					Pythagoras did not really fear these things nor
					guard against them, but forbade other things through
					these. Likewise the walking under a vine had reference to wine, signifying that it is not right for the
					priest to get drunk: for wine is over the heads of
					drunken men, and they are oppressed and humbled
					thereby, when they should be above it and always
					master this pleasure, not be mastered by it.
				 
 Did they regard the ivy as an unfruitful plant,
					useless to man, and feeble, and because of its weakness needing other plants to support it, but by its
					shade and the sight of its green fascinating to most
					people? And did they therefore think that it should
					not be uselessly grown in their homes nor be allowed
					to twine about in a futile way, contributing nothing,
					since it is injurious to the plants forming its support?
				 
 Or is it because it cleaves to the ground? Wherefore
					it is excluded from the ritual of the Olympian gods, nor
					can any ivy be seen in the temple of Hera at Athens,
					or in the temple of Aphroditê; at Thebes: but it has
					its place in the Agrionia and the Nyctelia, the rites
					of which are for the most part performed at night.
					
					 
					
				 
 Or was this also a symbolic prohibition of Bacchic
					revels and orgies? For women possessed by Bacchic
					frenzies rush straightway for ivy and tear it to pieces,
					clutching it in their hands and biting it with their
					teeth: so that not altogether without plausibility are
					they who assert that ivy, possessing as it does an
					exciting and distracting breath of madness, deranges
					persons and agitates them, and in general brings on a
					wineless drunkenness and joyousness in those that
					are precariously disposed towards spiritual exaltation.

Why were these priests not allowed to hold
					office nor to solicit it, yet they have the service of
					a lictor and the right to a curule chair as an honour
					and a consolation for holding no office? 
				 
 Is this similar to the conditions in some parts of
					Greece where the priesthood had a dignity commensurate with that of the kingship, and they
					appointed as priests no ordinary men?
				 
 Or was it rather that since priests have definite
					duties, whereas officials have duties which are irregular and undefined, if the occasions for these
					duties happened to coincide, it was impossible for the
					same man to be present at both, but oftentimes, when
					both duties were pressing, he had to neglect one of
					them and at one time commit impiety against the
					gods, and at another do hurt to his fellow-citizens?
				 
 Or did they observe that there is implicit in the
					government of men no less constraint than authority,
					and that the ruler of the people, as Hippocrates said
					
					 
					
					of the physician, must see dreadful things and touch
					dreadful things and reap painful emotions of his own
					from the ills of other men? Did they, then, think it
					impious for a man to offer sacrifice to the gods, and to
					take the lead in the sacred rites, if he was concerned
					in pronouncing judgements and sentences of death
					upon citizens, and often upon kinsmen and members
					of his household, such as fell to the lot of Brutus?