INTRODUCTION 
 Plutarch's essay on Virtue and Vice is an excellent sermon which has not
					been overlooked by Christian preachers.

Clothes are supposed to make a man warm, not of course by warming him
					themselves in the sense of adding their warmth to him, because each garment
					by itself is cold, and for this reason very often persons who feel hot and
					feverish keep changing from one set of clothes to another; but the warmth
					which a man gives off from his own person the clothing, closely applied to
					the body, confines and enwraps, and does not allow it, when thus imprisoned
					in the body, to be dissipated again. Now the same condition existing in
					human affairs deceives most people, who think that, if they surround
					themselves with vast houses, and get together a mass of slaves and money,
					they shall live pleasantly. But a pleasant and happy life comes not from
					external things, but, on the contrary, man draws on his own character as a
					source from which to add the element of pleasure and joy to the things
					which surround him. Bright with a blazing fire a house looks far more
					cheerful, and wealth is pleasanter, and repute and power more resplendent,
					if with them goes the gladness which springs from the heart; and so too men
					bear poverty, exile, and old age lightly and gently in proportion to the
					serenity and mildness of their character.

As perfumes make coarse and ragged garments fragrant, but the body of
					Anchises gave off a noisome exudation, Damping the linen robe adown his
						back, 
 so every occupation and manner of life, if attended by virtue, is
					untroubled and delightful, while, on the other hand, any admixture of vice
					renders those things which to others seem splendid, precious, and imposing,
					only troublesome, sickening, and unwelcome to their possessors. This man is
						happy deemed 'mid public throng, But when he opes his door he's thrice a
						wretch; His wife controls, commands, and always fights. 
 Yet it is not
					difficult for any man to get rid of a bad wife if he be a real man and not a
					slave; but against his own vice it is not possible to draw up a writing of
					divorcement and forthwith to be rid of troubles and to be at peace, having
					arranged to be by himself. No, his vice, a settled tenant of his very vitals
					always, both at night and by day, Burns, but without e'er a brand, and
						consigns to an eld all untimely. 
 For in travelling vice is a troublesome
					companion because of arrogance, at dinner an expensive companion owing to
					gluttony, and a distressing bedfellow, since by anxieties, cares and
					jealousies it drives out and destroys sleep. For what slumber there may be
					is sleep and repose for the body only, but for the soul terrors, dreams, and
					agitations, because of superstition. 
					 
 When grief o'ertakes me as I close my eyes, I'm murdered
						by my dreams. 
 says one man. In such a state do envy, fear, temper, and
					licentiousness put a man. For by day vice, looking outside of itself and
					conforming its attitude to others, is abashed and veils its emotions, and
					does not give itself up completely to its impulses, but oftentimes resists
					them and struggles against them; but in the hours of slumber, when it has
					escaped from opinion and law, and got away as far as possible from feeling
					fear or shame, it sets every desire stirring, and awakens its depravity and
					licentiousness. It attempts incest, as Plato says, partakes
					of forbidden meats, abstains from nothing which it wishes to do, but revels
					in lawlessness so far as it can, with images and visions which end in no
					pleasure or accomplishment of desire, but have only the power to stir to
					fierce activity the emotional and morbid propensities.

Where, then, is the pleasure in vice, if in no part of it is to be found
					freedom from care and grief, or contentment or tranquillity or calm? For a
					wellbalanced and healthy condition of the body gives room for engendering
					the pleasures of the flesh; but in the soul lasting joy and gladness cannot
					possibly be engendered, unless it provide itself first with cheerfulness,
					fearlessness, and courageousness as a basis to rest upon, or as a calm
					tranquillity that no billows disturb; otherwise, even though some hope or
					delectation lure us with a smile, anxiety suddenly breaks 
					
					 forth, like a hidden rock appearing in fair weather,
					and the soul is overwhelmed and confounded.

Heap up gold, amass silver, build stately promenades, fill your house with
					slaves and the city with your debtors; unless you lay level the emotions of
					your soul, put a stop to your insatiate desires, and quit yourself of fears
					and anxieties, you are but decanting wine for a man in a fever, offering
					honey to a bilious man, and preparing tid-bits and dainties for sufferers
					from colic or dysentery, who cannot retain them or be strengthened by them,
					but are only brought nearer to death thereby. Does not your observation of
					sick persons teach you that they dislike and reject and decline the finest
					and costliest viands which their attendants offer and try to force upon them
					; and then later, when their whole condition has changed, and good
					breathing, wholesome blood, and normal temperature have returned to their
					bodies, they get up and have joy and satisfaction in eating plain bread with
					cheese and cress? It is such a condition that reason creates in the soul.
					You will be contented with your lot if you learn what the honourable and
					good is. You will be luxurious in poverty, and live like a king, and you
					will find no less satisfaction in the care-free life of a private citizen
					than in the life connected with high military or civic office. If you become
					a philosopher, you will live not unpleasantly, but you will learn to subsist
					pleasantly anywhere and with any resources. Wealth will give you gladness
					for the good you will do to many, poverty for your freedom from many cares,
					repute for the honours you will enjoy, and obscurity for the certainty that
					you shall not be envied.