Alexander longed to bathe in the Cydnus on
seeing that the stream was fair and clear, safely
deep, agreeably swift, delightful to swim in and cool
in the height of summer; even with foreknowledge
of the fever which he contracted from it, I do not
think he would have abstained from his plunge.
Then can it be that on seeing a hall beyond compare
in the greatness of its size, the splendour of its
beauty, the brilliance of its illumination, the lustre
of its gilding and the gaiety of its pictures, a man
would not long to compose speeches in it, if this
were his business, to seek repute and win glory in
it, to fill it with his voice and, as far as lay in him,
to become part and parcel of its beauty? Or after
looking it over carefully and admiring it, would he
rather go away and leave it mute and voiceless,
without according it a word of greeting or a particle
of intercourse, as if he were dumb or else out of illwill had resolved to hold his tongue?

Heracles! such
conduct would not be that of a connoisseur or a
lover of beauty; it would be very vulgar, tasteless,
even Philistine to despise what is sweetest, to reject
what is fairest, and not to comprehend that in all
that appeals to the eye, the same law does not hold
for ordinary and for educated men. No, for the former
it is enough to do the usual thing—just to see, to
look about, to cast their eyes everywhere, to crane


 

their necks at the ceiling, to gesticulate and to take
their joy in silence for fear of not being able to say
anything adequate to what they see. But when a
man’ of culture beholds beautiful things, he will not
be content, I am sure, to harvest their charm. with
his eyes alone, and will not endure to be a silent
spectator of their beauty; he will do all he can to
linger there and make some return for the spectacle
in speech.

And such a return does not consist
simply in praising the hall. No doubt it was fitting -
for Homer's island boy
 
to be astounded at the house
of Menelaus and to compare its ivory and gold to the
beautiful things in heaven because he had never seen
anything else on earth that was beautiful. But to
speak here, to collect an audience of cultured men
and show one’s eloquence is also a form of praise.
It is very delightful, I think, that the fairest of
halls should be flung open for the harbourage of
speech and should be full of praise and laudation;
re-echoing softly like a cavern, following what is
said, drawing out the concluding sounds of the voice
and lingering on the last words ; or, to put it better,
committing to memory all that one says, like an
appreciative hearer, and applauding the speaker and
gracefully repeating his phrases. In some such way
the rocks pipe in answer to the piping of the shepherds when the sound comes back again by repercussion and returns upon itself. The untaught think
it is a maid who answers all who sing and shout,



 

abiding somewhere in the heart of the cliffs and
talking from the inside of the crags.

To me, at least, it seems that a splendid hall
excites the speaker's fancy and stirs it to speech, as
if he were somehow prompted by what he sees.
No doubt something of beauty flows through the
eyes into the soul, and then fashions into the likeness of itself the words that it sends out. In the
case of Achilles, the sight of his armour enhanced
his anger at the Trojans, and when he put it on to
try it, he was inspired and transported with the lust
of battle. 
Then are we to believe that the passion
for speech is not enhanced by beautiful surroundings? Socrates was satisfied with a fine plane-tree
and lush grass and a spring of clear water.not far from
the Ilissus: sitting there, he plied his irony at the
expense of Phaedrus of Myrrhinus, criticised the
speech of Lysias, son of Cephalus, and invoked
the Muses, believing that they would come to a
sequestered spot and take part in the debate on
love, and thinking no shame, old as he was, to invite
maids to join him in amorous ditties.

 
May we not
suppose that they would come to a place as beautiful
as this, even without an invitation ?

In truth, our shelter is not to be compared with
mere shade or with the beauty of a plane-tree, not
even if you pass over the one on the Ilissus and
mention the Great King’s golden plane. That was
wonderful only on account of its cost ; there was no





 

craftsmanship or beauty or charm or symmetry or
grace wrought into the gold or combined with it.
The thing was barbarous, nothing but money, a
source of envy to those who saw it, and of felicitation to those who owned it. There was nothing
praiseworthy about it. The Arsacids 
neither cared
for beauty nor aimed at attractiveness in making
their display nor minded whether the spectators
praised or not,as long as they were astounded.

The
barbarians are not beauty-levers; they are moneylovers. On the contrary, the beauty of this hall
has nothing to do with barbarian eyes, Persian
flattery, or Sultanic vainglory. Instead of just a
poor man, it wants a cultured man for a spectator,
who, instead of judging with his eyes, applies thought
to what he sees.
It faces the fairest quarter of the day (for the
fairest and loveliest is surely the beginning); it
welcomes in the sun when he first peeps up; light
fills it to overflowing through the wide-flung doors ;
the proportion of length to “breadth and of both to
height is harmonious; the windows are generous
and well-suited to every season of the year. Is not
all this attractive and praiseworthy ?

One might also admire the ceiling for its reserved
modelling, its flawless decoration, and the refined -
symmetry of its gilding, which is not unnecessarily




 

lavish, but only in such degree as would suffice a
modest and beautiful woman to set off her beauty—
a delicate chain round her neck, a light ring on her
finger, pendants in her ears, a buckle, a band that
confines the luxuriance of her hair and adds as much
to her good looks as a purple border adds to a gown.
It is courtesans, especially the less attractive of
them, who have clothing all purple and necks all
gold, trying to secure seductiveness by extravagance
and to make up for their lack of beauty by the
addition of extraneous charms ; they think that their
arms will look whiter when they are bright with
gold, and that the unshapeliness of their feet will
escape notice in golden sandals, and that their very
faces will be lovelier when seen together with
something very bright. This is the course they
follow ; but a modest girl uses only what gold is
sufficient and necessary, and would not be ashamed
of her beauty, I am sure, if she were to show it
unadorned.

The ceiling of this hall—call it the face if you
will—well-featured itself, is as much embellished by
the gilding as heaven by the stars at night, with
sprinkled lights and scattered flowers of fire. If all
were fire, it would be terrible, not beautiful, to us.
You will observe that the gilding yonder is not
purposeless, and not intermingled with the rest of the
decorations for its own charm alone. It shines witha


 

sweet radiance, and colours the whole hall with its
flush ; for when the light, striking the gold, lays
hold of it and combines with it, they gleam jointly
and make the flush doubly brilliant.

Such is the top, the summit of the hall: it
needs a Homer to praise it by calling it “highceiled” like the chamber of Helen
 

or “dazzling” like
Olympus.

 
The rest of the decoration, the frescoes
on the walls, the beauty of their colours, and the
vividness, exactitude, and truth of each detail might
well be compared with the face of spring and with a
flowery field, except that those things fade and
wither and change and cast their beauty, while this
is spring eternal, field unfading, bloom undying.
Naught but the eye touches it and culls the
sweetness of what it sees.

Who would not be charmed with the sight or
all these beautiful things? Who would not want to
outdo himself in speaking among them, aware that
it is highly disgraceful not to be a match for that
which one sees? The sight of beauty is seductive,
and not to man alone. Even a horse, I think, would
find more pleasure in running on a soft, sloping plain
that receives his tread pleasantly, yields a little to
his foot, and does not shock his hoof. Then he puts
in play all his power of running, gives himself over
to speed and nothing else, and vies with the beauty
of the plain.

The peacock, too, at the opening



 

of spring goes to a field at the time when the
biossoms which it puts out are not only lovelier, but,
in a manner of speaking, more blossomy and brighter
of hue; spreading his wings and showing them to
the sun, lifting his tail and surrounding himself with
it, he, too, displays his blossoms and the April of his
wings, as if the field were challenging him to vie with
it. Atall events, he twists and turns and puts on airs
with his beauty. Now and again he is a sight still
more wonderful, when his colours change under the
light, altering a little and turning to a different kind
of loveliness. This happens to him chiefly in the
circles that he has at the tips of his feathers, each
of which is ringed with a rainbow. What was previously bronze has the look of gold when he shifts a
little, and what was bright blue in the sun is bright
green in shadow, so much does the beauty of his
plumage alter with the light!

For you know without my telling you that the sea has power to invite
and provoke longing when it is calm. At such a
time, no matter how much of a landsman and a
lubber a man may be, he wants at all costs to get
aboard ship and cruise about and go far from land,
above all if he perceives the breeze gently swelling the
canvas and the vessel sweetly and smoothly gliding
along, little by little, over the crest of the waves.

Certainly, then, the beauty. of this hall has
power to rouse a man to speech, to spur him on in
speaking and to make him succeed in every- way. I
for my part am trusting in all this and have already


 

trusted in it; in coming to the hall to speak, I was
attracted by its beauty as by a magic wheel or a
Siren, for I had no slight hope that even if my
phrases were homely before, they would seem
beautiful if adorned, so to speak, in fine clothing.

There is, however, another point of view, not
insignificant but very important, if you take Mr. Point
o’ View's word for it; he kept interrupting me
as I spoke and trying to break up my speech, and
now that I have paused he says that I am mistaken
in this matter: he is surprised that I should say a
beautiful hall adorned with painting and gilding is
better suited for the display of eloquence, as the case
is entirely the reverse. But if you approve, let Mr.
Point o’ View himself take the floor in his own behalt
and tell you as he would a jury wherein he thinks a
mean and ugly hall more advantageous to the speaker.
You have heard me already, so that I do not need to
speak again to the same topic; let him take the
floor now and say his say, and I will be still and
ield to him for a time.

“Well, gentlemen of the jury,” says Mr. Point
o’ View, “the last speaker has made many striking
points in praise of the hall, and has adorned it with
his words. I myself am so far from intending to
criticise it that I have in mind to add the points
which he omitted, for the more beautiful you think
it, the more hostile to the speaker's interest it will
be, as I shall show.

 

 

“First, then, since he has mentioned women,
jewelry and gold, permit me also to make use of the
comparison. I assert that, far from contributing to
the good looks of a beautiful woman, abundant

 

jewelry is actually a detriment. Everyone who
meets her is dazzled by her gold and her expensive
gems, and instead of praising her complexion, her
eyes, her neck, her arm or her finger, he neglects
them and lets his eyes wander ta her sard or her
emerald, her necklace or her bracelet. She might
fairly get angry at being thus slighted for her
ornaments, when observers are too occupied to pay
her compliments and think her looks a side-issue.

The same thing is bound to happen, I think, to a man
who tries to show his eloquence among works of art
like these. Amid the mass of beautiful things, what
he says goes unheeded, vanishes and is absorbed, as if a
candle were taken toa great fire and thrown in, or’
an ant pointed out on the back of an elephant or a
camel. This danger, certainly, the speaker must
guard against, and also that his voice be not disturbed
when he speaks in a hall so musical and echoing, for
it resounds, replies, refutes—in fact, it drowns his
utterance, just as the trumpet drowns the flute when
they are played together, and as the sea drowns
chanty-men when they undertake to sing for the
rowers against the noise of the surf. For the great
volume of sound overpowers and crushes into silence
all that is weaker.

"As to the other point which my opponent made,
that a beautiful hall spurs a speaker on and makes
him more ambitious, I think it does the opposite.
It dazzles and frightens him, disturbs his thought
and makes him more timid, for he reflects that it is
disgraceful beyond everything that his discourse


 

should not match a place so beautiful. For such surroundings put a man most clearly to the proof. It is
’ asif he should put on a handsome coat of mail and then
take to his heels.before the rest, making his cowardice
only the more conspicuous for his armour. This,
‘I think, is the consideration which causes Homer's
famous orator to think very little of good-looks and
even make himself appear ‘ an utter know-nothing’ in
order that the beauty of his words may seem more
striking by comparison with that which is uglier.
Besides, it is inevitable that the speaker’s own mind
should be occupied in looking, and that the accuracy
of his thinking should be disturbed because what he
is looking at gets the better of him, attracts him and
‘does not allow him to attend to what he is saying.
So how can he help speaking very badly, when in
spirit he is busied with the praise of all that he sees?

“I forbear to say that even those who are
present and have been invited to the lecture become
spectators instead of hearers when they enter such a
hall as this, and no speaker is enough of a Demodocus, a Phemius, a Thamyris, an Amphion or an
Orpheus to distract their minds from looking. Why,
every one of them is flooded with beauty the instant
he crosses the threshold, and does not give the least
sign of hearing what the speaker says or anything
else, but is all absorbed in what he sees, unless he is
stone-blind or like the court of the Areopagus,
listens in the dark!

That the power of the tongue
is no match for the eyes, one can learn by comparing





 

the story of the Sirens with the one about the
Gorgons. The Sirens charmed passing voyagers by
making music and working on them with songs, and
held them long when they put in. In short, their
performance only exacted a delay, and no doubt one
or another voyager went by them, neglecting their
music. On the contrary, the beauty of the Gorgons, °
being extremely powerful and affecting the very
vitals of the soul, stunned its beholdersand made
them speechless, so that, as the story has it and
everyone says, they turned to stone in wonder.
For this reason I count what my opponent said
to you a moment ago about the peacock a plea for
my side: surely his attractiveness is in his looks,
not in his voice! If anybody should match a nightingale or a swan against him, letting them sing -
and showing the peacock silent while they were
singing, I “know well that your soul would go
over to him, bidding a long farewell to their songs.
So invincible, it seems, is the delight of the eyes!

If you wish, I will produce you a witness in the
person of a sage, who will testify on the spot that
what one sees is far more effective than what
one hears. Crier, summon in person Herodotus, son
‘of Lyxus, of Halicarnassus. Since he has been
so kind as to comply, let him take the stand and
give his testimony. Suffer him to speak to you in
Ionic, to which he is accustomed.
“'Master Point o’ View telleth ye true herein.
Believe whatso he sayeth to this matter, esteeming
sight over hearing, for in sooth ears be less trusty
than eyes.’
 


 

“Do you hear what the witness says, that he gives
the palm to sight? With reason, for words are
winged and go flying off the instant they have left
the lips, while the beauty of things seen is always
present and lasting and entices the spectator, will
he, nill he.

"Is not then a hall so beautiful and admirable
a dangerous adversary to a speaker? But I ,have
not yet mentioned the principal point. You yourselves, gentlemen of the jury, have been regarding
the roof as we spoke, admiring the walls and
examining the pictures, turning toward each of
them. Do not be ashamed! It is excusable if you
have felt a touch of human nature, especially in the
presence of pictures so beautiful and so varied. The
exactness of their technique and the combination of
antiquarian interest and instructiveness in their
subjects are truly seductive and call for a cultivated
‘spectator. That you may not look exclusively in that
direction and leave us in the lurch, I will do my best
to paint you a word-picture of them, for I think you
will be glad to hear about things which you look at
with admiration. Perhaps you will even applaud me
for it and prefer me to my opponent, saying. that I
have displayed my powers as well as he, and that I
have made your pleasure double. But the difficulty of
the task is patent, to represent so many pictures without colour, form or space. Word-painting is but a
bald thing.

“On the right as you come in, you have a‘ combination of Argolic myth and Ethiopian romance.
Perseus is killing the sea-monster and freeing
Andromeda ; in a little while he will marry her and
go away with her. It is an incident to his winged
quest of the Gorgons. The artist has represented
much in little—the maid’s modesty and terror (for
she is looking down on the fight from the cliff
overhead), the lad’s fond courage and the beast’s
unconquerable mien. ‘As he comes on bristling with
spines and inspiring terror with his gaping jaws
Perseus displays the Gorgon in his left hand, and
with his right assails him with the sword: the part
of the monster which has seen the Medusa is already
stone, and the part that is still alive is feeling the
hanger’s edge.

“Next to this picture is portrayed another righteous deed, for which the painter derived his model,
I suppose, from Euripides or Sophocles, inasmuch as
they have portrayed the subject in the same way.
 
The two youthful comrades Pylades of Phocis and
Orestes (supposed to be dead) have secretly entered
the palace and are slaying Aegisthus. Clytemnestra
is already slain and is stretched on a bed half-naked,
and the whole household is stunned by tle deed—
some are shouting, apparently, and others casting
about for a way of escape. It was a noble device on
the painter’s part simply to indicate the impious
element in the undertaking and pass it over as an




 

accomplished fact, and to represent the young men
lingering over the slaying of the adulterer/

“Next is a handsome god and a pretty boy, a
scene of fond foolery. Branchus, sitting on a rock,
is holding up a hare and teasing his dog, while the
dog is apparently going to spring up at him; Apollo,
standing near, is smiling in amusement at the tricks
of the lad and the efforts of the dog.

“Then comes Perseus again, in the adventure:
which preceded the sea-monster. He is cutting off
the head of Medusa, and Athena is shielding him.
He has done the daring deed, but has not looked,
except at the reflection of the Gorgon in the shield,
for he knows the cost of looking at the reality.

“In the middle of the wall, above the postern 
is constructed a shrine of Athena. The goddess is
‘of marble, and is not in harness but as a war-goddess.
would appear when at peace.

“Then we have another Athena, not of marble
this time, but in colours as before. Hephaestus is
pursuing her amorously; she is running away and
Erichthonius is being engendered of the chase.

"On this there follows another prehistoric picture.
Orion, who is blind, is carrying Cedalion, and the
latter, riding on his back, is showing him the way
to the sunlight.

"The rising sun is healing the
blindness of Orion, and Hephaestus views the incident from Lemnos.

“Odysseus is next, feigning madness because




 

he does not want to make the campaign with the
sons of Atreus. The ambassadors are there to
summon him, All the details of his pretence are
true to life—the wagon, the ill-matched team,
 
the
folly of his actions. He is shown up, however, by
means of his child. Palamedes, son of Nauplius,
comprehending the situation, seizes Telemachus and
threatens, sword in hand, to kill him, meeting
Odysseus’ pretence of madness with a pretence of
anger. In the face of this fright Odysseus grows
sane, becomes a father and abandons his pretence.

“Last of all Medea is pictured aflame with
jealousy, looking askance at her two boys with a
terrible purpose in her mind—indeed, she already
has her sword—while the poor children sit there
laughing, unsuspicious of the future, although they
see the sword in her hands.

“Do you not see, gentlemen of the jury, how
all these things attract the hearer and turn him away
to look, leaving the speaker stranded? My purpose
in describing them was not that you might think
my opponent bold and daring for voluntarily attacking a task sp difficult, and so pronounce against him,
dislike him and leave him floundering, but that on
the contrary you might support him and do your
best to close your eyes and listen to what he says,
taking into consideration the hardness of the thing.
Even under these circumstances, when he has you



 

as supporters, not judges, it will be just barely possible for him to avoid being thought altogether unworthy of the splendour of the hall. Do not be
surprised that I make this request in behalf of an
adversary, for on account of my fondness for the hall
I should like anyone who may speak in it, no matter
who he is, to be successful.”