Can you tell me, Philocles, what in the world it is
that makes many men so fond of lying that they
delight in telling preposterous tales themselves and
listen with especial attention to those who spin yarns
of that sort?
 
 PHILOCLES 
There are many reasons, Tychiades, which constrain
men occasionally to tell falsehoods with an eye to
the usefulness of it.
 
 TYCHIADES 
That has nothing to do with the case, as the phrase
is, for I did not ask about men who lie for advantage.
They are pardonable—yes, even praiseworthy, some
of them, who have deceived national enemies or for
safety’s sake have used this kind of expedient in
extremities, as Odysseus often did in seeking to win
his own life and the return of his comrades. No,
my dear sir, I am speaking of those men who put
sheer useless lying far ahead of truth, liking the
thing and whiling away their time at it without any
valid excuse. I want to know about these men, to
what end they do this.

PHILOCLES 
Have you really noted any such men anywhere in
whom this passion for lying is ingrained ?
 
 TYCHIADES 
Yes, there are many such men.
 
 PHILOCLES 
What other reason, then, than folly may they be
said to have for telling untruths, since they choose
the worst course instead of the best? —
 
 TYCHIADES 
That too has nothing to do with the case, Philocles,
for I could show you many men otherwise sensible
and remarkable for their intelligence who have somehow become infected with this plague and are lovers
of lying, so that it irks me when such men, excellent
in every way, yet delight in deceiving themselves
and their associates. Those of olden time should be
known to you before I mention them— Herodotus,
and Ctesias of Cnidus, and before them the poets,
including Homer himself—men of renown, who made
use of the written lie, so that they not only deceived
those who listened to them then, but transmitted the
falsehood from generation to generation even down
to us, conserved in the choicest of diction and rhythm.
For my part it. often occurs to me to blush for them
when they tell of the castration of Uranus, and the
fetters of Prometheus, and the revolt of the Giants,
and the whole sorry show in Hades, and how Zeus
turned into a bull or a swan on account of a loveaffair, and how some woman changed into a bird or a

 

bear; yes, andof Pegasi, Chimaerae, Gorgons, Cyclopes,
and so forth—very strange and wonderful fables, fit
to enthrall the souls of children who still dread
Mormo and Lamia.

Yet as far as the poets are concerned, perhaps the
case is not so bad; but is it not ridiculous that even
cities and whole peoples tell lies unanimously and
officially ? The Cretans exhibit the tomb of Zeus and
are not ashamed of it, and the Athenians assert that
Erichthonius sprang from the earth and that the first
men came up out of the soil of Attica like vegetables ;
but at that their story is much more dignified than
that of the Thebans, who relate that ““Sown Men”
grew up from serpents’ teeth. If any man, however,
does not think that these silly stories are true, but
sanely puts them to the proof and holds that only a
Coroebus or a Margites can believe either that
Triptolemus drove through the air behind winged
serpents, or that Pan came from Arcadia to Marathon
to take a hand in the battle, or that Oreithyia was
carried off by Boreas, they consider that man a sacrilegious fool for doubting facts so evident and genuine ;
to such an extent does falsehood prevail.

PHILOCLES 
Well, as far as the poets are concerned, Tychiades,
and the cities too, they may properly be pardoned.
The poets flavour their writings with the delectability
that the fable yields, a most seductive thing, which
they need above all else for the benefit of their
readers ; and the Athenians, Thebans and others, if


 

any there be, make their countries more impressive
by such means. In fact, if these fabulous tales
should be taken away from Greece, there would be
nothing to prevent the guides there from starving to
death, as the foreigners would not care to hear the
truth, even gratis! On the other hand, those who
have no such motive and yet delight in lying may
properly be thought utterly ridiculous.

TYCHIADES 
You are quite right in what you say. For example,
I come to you from Eucrates the magnificent, having
listened to a great lot of incredible yarns; to put it
more accurately, I took myself off in the midst of
the conversation because I could not stand the
exaggeration of the thing: they drove me out as if
they had been the Furies by telling quantities of
extraordinary miracles.
 
 PHILOCLES 
But, Tychiades, Eucrates is a trustworthy person,
and nobody could ever believe that he, with such a
long beard, a man of sixty, and a great devotee of
philosophy too, would abide even to hear someone
else tell a lie in his presence, let alone venturing to
do anything of that sort himself.
 
 TYCHIADES 
Why, my dear fellow, you do not know what sort
of statements he made, and how he confirmed them,
and how he actually swore to most of them, taking
oath upon his children, so that as I gazed at him all
sorts of ideas came into my head, now that he was
insane and out of his right mind, now that he was
only a fraud, after all, and I had failed, in all these

 

years, to notice that his lion’s skin covered a silly
ape; so extravagant were the stories that he told.
 
 PHILOCLES 
What were they, Tychiades, in the name of Hestia? 
I should like to know what sort of quackery he has
been screening behind that great beard.

TYCHIADES 
I used to visit. him previously, Philocles, whenever I had a good deal of leisure; and to-day, when I
wanted to find Leontichus, a close friend of mine, as
you know, and was told by his boy that he had gone
off to the house of Eucrates in the early morning to
pay him a call because he was ill, I went there for
two reasons, both to find Leontichus and to see
Eucrates, for I had not known that he was ill. 

 
I did not find Leontichus there, for he had just
gone out a little while before, they said ; but I found
plenty of others, among whom there was Cleodemus
the Peripatetic, and Deinomachus the Stoic, and Ion
—you know the one that thinks he ought to be
admired for his mastery of Plato’s doctrines as the
only person who has accurately sensed the man’s
meaning and can expound it to the rest of the world.
You see what sort of men I am naming to you, allwise and all-virtuous, the very fore-front of each
school, every one venerable, almost terrible, to look
at. In addition, the physician Antigonus was there,
called in, I suppose, by reason of the illness. Eucrates
seemed to be feeling better already, and the ailment
was of a chronic character; he had had another attack
of rheumatism in his feet.


 
 

 
He bade me sit by him on the couch, letting his
voice drop a little to the tone of an invalid when he
saw me, although as I was coming in I heard him
shouting and vigorously pressing some point or other.
I took very good care not to touch his feet, and
after making the customary excuses that I did not
know he was ill and that when I learned of it I
came in hot haste, sat down beside him.

It so happened that the company had already, I
think, talked at some length about his ailment and
were then discussing it further; they were each
suggesting certain remedies, moreover. At any rate
Cleodemus said : “Well then, if you take up from the
ground in your left hand the tooth of the weasel
which has been killed in the way I have already
described and wrap it up in the skin of a lion just
flayed, and then bind it about your legs, the pain
ceases instantly.”

 

 
“Not in a lion’s skin, I was told,” said Deinomachus, “but that of a hind still immature and
unmated ; and the thing is more plausible that way,
for the hind is fleet and her strength lies especially
in her legs. The lion is brave, of course, and his fat
and his right fore-paw and the stiff bristles of his
whiskers are very potent if one knew how to use
them with the incantation appropriate to each ; but
for curing the feet he is not at all promising.”
 

 
“I myself,” said Cleodemus, “was of that opinion
formerly, that it ought to be the skin of a hind
because the hind is fleet ; but recently a man from

 

Libya, well informed in such things, taught me
better, saying that lions were fleeter than deer.
‘No fear!’ said he: ‘They even chase and catch
them!’”

The company applauded, in the belief that the
Libyan was right in what he said. But I said, “Do
you really think that certain incantations put a stop to
this sort of thing, or external applications, when the
trouble has its seat within?” They laughed at my
remark andclearly held meconvicted of great stupidity
if I did not know the most obvious things, of which
nobody in his right mind would maintain that they
were not so. The doctor Antigonus, however,
seemed to me to be pleased with my question, for
he had been overlooked a long time, I suppose,
when he wanted to aid Eucrates in a professional —
way by advising him to abstain from wine, adopt a
vegetarian diet, and in general to “lower his pitch.”

 

 
But Cleodemus, with a faint smile, said: ‘“What
is that, Tychiades? Do you consider it incredible
that any alleviations of ailments are effected by
such means?” “TI do,’ said I, “not being altogether full of drivel, so as to believe that external
remedies which have nothing to do with the internal
causes of the ailments, applied as you say in combination with set phrases and _ hocus-pocus of
some sort, are efficacious and bring on the cure.
That could never happen, not even if you should
wrap sixteen entire weasels in the skin of the Nemean
lion; in fact I have often seen the lion himself
limping in pain with his skin intact upon him!”

“You are a mere layman, you see,’ said Deinomachus, “and you have not made it a point to learn

 

how such things agree with ailments when they are
applied. I do not suppose you would accept even
the most obvious instances—periodic fevers driven
off, snakes charmed, swellings cured, and whatever
else even old wives do. But if all that takes
place, why in the world will you not believe that
this takes place by similar means?”
 

 
“You are reasoning from false premises, Deinomachus,” I replied, “and, as the saying goes, driving.
out one nail with another; for it is not clear that
precisely what you are speaking of takes place by
the aid of any such power. If, then, you do not
first convince me by logical proof that it takes place
in this way naturally, because the fever or the inflammation is afraid of a holy name or a foreign phrase
and so takes flight from the swelling, your stories
still remain old wives’ fables.”

“It seems to me,” said Deinomachus, “that when
you talk like that you do not believe in the gods,
either, since you do not think that cures can be
effected through holy names.’ “Don’t say that, my
dear sir!” I replied. “Even though the gods exist,
there is nothing to prevent that sort of thing from
being false just the same. For my part, I revere the
gods and I see their cures and all the good that
they do by restoring the sick to health with drugs
and doctoring. In fact, Asclepius himself and his
sons ministered to the sick by laying on healing
drugs, not by fastening on lions’ skins and weasels.”

“Never mind him,” said Ion, “and I will tell you


 

a wonderful story. I was still a young lad, about
fourteen years old, when someone came and told
my father that Midas the vine-dresser, ordinarily a
strong and industrious servant, had been bitten by
a viper toward midday and was lying down, with his
leg already in a state of mortification. While he
was tying up the runners and twining them about
the poles, the creature had crawled up and bitten
him on the great toe; then it had quickly gone
down again into its hole, and he was groaning in
mortal anguish.

 

 
“As this report was being maile, we saw Midas
himself being brought up on a litter by his fellowslaves, all swollen and livid, with a clammy skin and
but little breath left in him. Naturally my father
was distressed, but a friend who was there said
to him: ‘Cheer up: I will at once go and get you
a Babylonian, one of the so-called Chaldeans, who
will cure the fellow.’ Not to make a long story of
it, the Babylonian came and brought Midas back
to life, driving the poison out of his body by a
spell, and also binding upon his foot a fragment
which he broke from the tombstone of a dead
maiden.
 

 
“Perhaps this is nothing out of the common:
although Midas himself picked up the litter on
which he had been carried and went off to the farm,
so potent was the spell and the fragment of the
tombstone.

But the Babylonian did other things that
were truly miraculous. Going to the farm in the early
morning, he repeated seven sacred names out of an
old book, purified the place with sulphur and torches,
going about. it three times, and called out all the


 

reptiles that there were inside the boundaries. They
came as if they were being drawn in response to the
spell, snakes in great numbers, asps, vipers, horned
snakes, darters, common toads, and puff-toads; one
old python, however, was missing, who on account
of his age, I suppose, could not creep out and so
failed to comply with the command. The magician
said that not all were there, and electing one of the
snakes messenger, the youngest, sent him after the
python, who presently came too. When they were
assembled, the Babylonian blew on them and they
were all instantly burned up by the blast, and we
were amazed.”

“Tell me, Ion,” said I, “did the messenger snake,
the young one, give his arm to the python, who you
say was aged, or did the python have a stick and
lean on it?” 

 
“You are joking,” said Cleodemus: “I myself
was formerly more incredulous than you in regard to
such things, for I thought it in no way possible that
they could happen; but when first I saw the foreign
stranger fly—he came from the land of the Hyperboreans, he said—, I believed and was conquered
after long resistance. What was I to do when I saw
him soar through the air in broad daylight and walk
on the water and go through fire slowly on foot?”
“Did you see that?’ said I—“the Hyperborean
flying, or stepping on the water?” “Certainly,”
said he, “with brogues on his feet such as people of
that country commonly wear. As for the trivial

 

feats, what is the use of telling all that he performed,
sending Cupids after people, bringing up supernatural beings, calling mouldy corpses to life, making
Hecate herself appear in plain sight, and pulling
down the moon?

But after all, I will tell you what I
saw him do in the house of Glaucias, son of Alexicles. 

 
“Immediately after Glaucias’ father died and he
acquired the property, he fell in love with Chrysis,
the wife of Demeas. I was in his employ as his
tutor in philosophy, and if that love-affair had not
kept him too busy, he would have known all the
teachings of the Peripatetic school, for even at
eighteen he was solving fallacies and had completed
the course of lectures on natural philosophy. At
his wit’s end, however, with his love-affair, he told
me the whole story; and as was natural, since I was
his tutor, I brought him that Hyperborean magician
at a fee of four minas down (it was necessary to pay
something in advance towards the cost of the victims)
and sixteen if he should obtain Chrysis. The man
waited for the moon to wax, as it is then, for the
most part, that such rites are performed ; and after
digging a pit in an open court of the house, at about
midnight he first summoned up for us Alexicles,
Glaucias’ father, who had died seven months before.
The old gentleman was indignant over the love-affair .
and flew into a passion, but at length he permitted
him to go on with it after all. Next he brought up
Hecate, who fetched Cerberus with her, and he drew
down the moon, a many-shaped spectacle, appearing
differently at different times; for at first she
exhibited the form of a woman, then she turned into
a handsome bull, and then she looked like a puppy.


 

Finally, the Hyperborean made a little Cupid out of
Clay and said: ‘Go and fetch Chrysis.’ The clay took
wing, and before long Chrysis stood on the threshold
knocking at the door, came in and embraced Glaucias
as if she loved him furiously, and remained with him
until we heard the cocks crowing. Then the moon
flew up to the sky, Hecate plunged beneath the earth,
the other phantasms disappeared, and we sent Chrysis
home at just about dawn.

If you had seen that,
Tychiades, you would no longer have doubted that
there is much good in spells.” 

 
“Quite so,” said I, “I should have believed if I
had seen it, but as things are I may perhaps be
pardoned if I am not able to see as clearly as you.
However, I know the Chrysis whom you speak of, an
amorous dame and an accessible one, and I do not
see why you needed the clay messenger and the
Hyperborean magician and the moon in person to
fetch her, when for twenty drachmas she could have
been brought to the Hyperboreans! The woman
is very susceptible to that spell, and her case is the
opposite to that of ghosts; if they hear a chink of
bronze or iron, they take flight, so you say, but as
for her, if silver chinks anywhere, she goes toward
the sound. Besides, I am surprised at the magician
himself, if he was able to have the love of the
richest women and get whole talents from them, and
yet made Glaucias fascinating, penny-wise that he is,
for four minas.”’

 
 

 
“You act ridiculously,” said Ion, “to doubt everything.

For my part, I should like to ask you what
you say to those who free possessed men from their
terrors by exorcising the spirits so manifestly. I
need not discuss this: everyone knows about the
Syrian from Palestine, the adept in it, how many he.
takes in hand who fall down in the light of the moon
and roll their eyes and fill their mouths with foam ;
nevertheless, he restores them to health and sends
them, away normal in mind, delivering them from
their straits for a large fee. When he stands beside
them as they lie there and asks: ‘Whence came
you into his body?’ the patient himself is silent,
but the spirit answers in Greek or in the language of
whatever foreign country he comes from, telling how
and whence he entered into the man; whereupon, by
adjuring the spirit and if he does not obey, threatening him, he drives him out. Indeed, I actually saw one
coming out, black and smoky in colour.” “It is
nothing much,” I remarked, “for you, Ion, to see
that kind of sight, when even the ‘ forms’? that the
father of your school, Plato, points out are plain to
you, a hazy object of vision to the rest of us, whose
eyes are weak.”

“Why, is Ion the only one who has seen that kind
of sight?” said Eucrates. “Have not many others
encountered spirits, some at night and some by day?
For myself, I have seen such things, not merely once
but almost hundreds of times. At first I was
disturbed by them, but now, of course, because of


 

their familiarity, I do not consider that I am seeing
anything out of the way, especially since the Arab
gave me the ring made of iron from crosses and
taught me the spell of many names. But perhaps
you will doubt me also, Tychiades.” “How could I
doubt Eucrates, the son of Deinon,” said I, “alearned
and an uncommonly independent gentleman, expressing his opinions in his own home, with complete
liberty?”

“Anyhow,” said Eucrates, “the affair of
the statue was observed every night by everybody
in the house, boys, young men and old men, and
you could hear about it not only from me but from
all our people.”” “Statue!” said I, ‘what do you
mean?” 

 
“Have you not observed on coming in,’ said he,
“avery fine statue set up in the hall, the work of
Demetrius, the maker of portrait-statues ?” “Do
you mean the discus-thrower,”’ said I, “the one bent
over in the position of the throw, with his head
turned back toward the hand that holds the discus,
with one leg slightly bent, looking as if he would
spring up all at once with the cast?” “Not that
one,” said he, “for that is one of Myron’s works, the
discus-thrower you speak of. Neither do I mean the
one beside it, the one binding his head with the
fillet, the handsome Jad, for that is Polycleitus’ work.
Never mind those to the right as you come in, among
which stand the tyrant-slayers, modelled’ by Critius
and Nesiotes; but if you noticed one beside the
fountain, pot-bellied, bald on the forehead, half
bared by the hang of his cloak, with some of the
hairs of his beard wind-blown and his veins prominent,
the image of a real man, that is the one I mean;

 

he is thought to be Pellichus, the Corinthian
general.”

“Yes,” I said, “I saw one to the right of the spout,
wearing fillets and withered wreaths, his breast
covered with gilt leaves.” “I myself puton the gilt
leaves,’ said Eucrates, “when he cured me of the
ague that was torturing me to death every other day.”
“Really, is our excellent Pellichus a doctor also?”
said I. “Do not mock,” Eucrates replied, “or before
long the man will punish you. I know what virtue
there is in this statue that you make fun of. Don’t
you suppose that he can send fevers upon whomsoever
he will, since it is possible for him to send them
away?” “May the manikin be gracious and
kindly,” said I, “since he is so manful. But what
else does everyone in the house see him doing ?” 

 
“As soon as night comes,” he said, “he gets down
from the pedestal on which he stands and goes all
about the house; we all encounter him, sometimes
singing, and he has never harmed anybody. One has
but to turn aside, and he passes without molesting in
any way those who saw him. Upon my word, he
often takes baths and disports himself all night, so
that the water can be heard splashing.”

“See here,
then,” said I, “perhaps the statue is not Pellichus
but Talos the Cretan, the son of Minos; he was a


 

bronze man, you know, and made the rounds in Crete.
If he were made of wood instead of bronze, there
would be nothing to hinder his being one of the
devices of Daedalus instead of a work of Demetrius ;
anyhow, he is like them in playing truant from his
pedestal, by what you say.”

“See here, Tychiades,”
said he, “‘perhaps you will be sorry for your joke
later on.



 I know what happened to the man who
stole the obols that we offer him on the first of each
month.” “It ought to have been something very
dreadful,” said Ion, “since he committed a sacrilege.
How was he punished, Eucrates? I should like to
hear about it, no matter how much Tychiades here
is going to doubt it.” 

 
“A number of obols,” he said, “were lying at his
feet, and some other small coins of silver had been
stuck to his thigh with wax, and leaves of silver,
votive offerings or payment for a cure from one or
another of those who through him had ceased to be
subject to fever. We had a plaguy Libyan servant,
a groom; the fellow undertook to steal and did steal
everything that was there, at night, after waiting
until the statue had descended. But as soon as
Pellichus came back and discovered that he had been
robbed, mark how he punished and exposed the
Libyan! The unhappy man ran about the hall the
whole night long unable to get out, just as if he had
been thrown into a labyrinth, until finally he was
caught in possession of the stolen property when
daycame. He got a sound thrashing then, on being
caught, and he did not long survive the incident,
dying a rogue’s death from being flogged, he said,
every night, so that welts showed on his body the


 

next day. In view of this, Tychiades, mock Pellichus
and think me as senile as if I were a contemporary
of Minos!” “Well, Eucrates,” I said, “as long as
bronze is bronze and the work a product of Demetrius
of Alopece, who makes men, not gods, I shall never
be afraid of the statue of Pellichus, whom I should
not have feared very much even when he was alive
if he threatened me.”

Thereupon Antigonus, the physician, said, “I
myself, Eucrates, have a bronze Hippocrates about
eighteen inches high. As soon as the light is
out, he goes all about the house making noises,
turning out the vials, mixing up the medicines, and
overturning the mortar, particularly when we are
behindhand with the sacrifice which we make to
him every year.” “Has it gone so far,’ said I,
“that even Hippocrates the physician demands
sacrifice in his honour and gets angry if he is not
feasted on unblemished victims at the proper season ?
He ought to be well content if anyone should
bring food to his tomb or pour him a libation of
milk and honey or put a wreath about his gravestone !”

“Let me tell you,” said Eucrates, “—this, I assure
you, is supported by witnesses—what I saw five
years ago. It happened to be the vintage season of
the year; passing through the farm at midday, I left
the labourers gathering the grapes and went off by
myself into the wood, thinking about something in
the meantime and turning it over in my mind.
When I was under cover, there came first a barking
of dogs, and I supposed that my son Mnason was at
his usual sport of following the hounds, and had


 

entered the thicket with his companions. This was
not the case, however; but after a short time there .
came an earthquake and with it a noise as of thunder,
and then I saw a terrible woman coming toward me,
quite half a furlong in height. She had a torch in
her left hand and a sword in her right, ten yards
long; below, she had snake-feet, and above she
resembled the Gorgon, in her stare, I mean, and the
frightfulness of her appearance ; moreover, instead
of hair she had the snakes falling down in ringlets,
twining about her neck, and some of them coiled
upon her shoulders.—See,” said he, “how my flesh .
creeps, friends, as I tell the story!’ And as he
spoke he showed the hairs on his forearm standing
on end (would you believe it?) because of his terror !

Ion, Deinomachus, Cleodemus, and the rest of
them, open-mouthed, were giving him unwavering attention, old men led by the nose, all but
doing obeisance to so unconvincing a colossus, a
woman half a furlong in height, a gigantic bugaboo!
For my part I was thinking in the meantime: “They
associate with young men to make them wise and
are admired by many, but what are they themselves?
Only their grey hair and their beard distinguishes
them from infants, and for the rest of it, even infants
are not so amenable to falsehood.”

Deinomachus,
for instance, said: “Tell me, Eucrates, the dogs of
the goddess—how big were they ?”
“Taller than Indian elephants,” he replied ;
“black, like them, with a shaggy coat of filthy,
tangled hair.— Well, at sight of her I stopped, at
the same time turning the gem that the Arab gave
me to the inside of my finger, and Hecate, stamping


 

on the ground with her serpent foot, made a
tremendous chasm, as deep as Tartarus; then after
a little she leaped into it and was gone. I plucked up
courage and looked over, taking hold of a tree that
grew close by, in order that I might not get a dizzy
turn and fall into it headlong. Then I saw everything in Hades, the River of Blazing Fire, and the
Lake, and Cerberus, and the dead, well enough to
recognise some of them. My father, for instance, I
saw distinctly, still wearing the same clothes in
which we buried him.” 

 
“What were the souls doing, Eucrates?”’ said Ion.
“What else would they be doing,” he said, “except
lying upon the asphodel to while away the time, along
with their friends and kinsmen by tribes and clans ?”’
“Now let the Epicureans go on contradicting holy
Plato,” said Ion, “and his doctrine about the souls!
But you did not see Socrates himself and Plato among
the dead?” “Socrates I saw,” he replied, “and
even him not for certain but by guess, because he
was bald and pot-bellied ; Plato I could not recognise,
for one must tell the truth to friends, I take it.
 

 
“No sooner had I seen everything sufficiently well
than the chasm came together and closed up; and
some of the servants who were seeking me, Pyrrhias
here among them, came upon the scene before the
chasm had completely closed. Tell them, Pyrrhias,
whether I am speaking the truth or not.” “Yes,
by Heaven,” said Pyrrhias, “and I heard barking,
too, through the chasm and a gleam of fire was

 

shining, from the torch, I suppose.’ I had to laugh
when the witness, to give good measure, threw in
the barking and the fire!

Cleodemus, however, said, “These sights that
you saw are not novel and unseen by anyone else,
for I myself when I was taken sick not long ago
witnessed something similar. Antigonus here visited
and attended me. It was the seventh day, and the
fever was like a calenture of the most raging type.
Leaving me by myself and shutting the door, they
all were waiting outside ; for you had given orders to
that: effect, Antigonus, on the chance that I might
fall asleep. Well, at that time there appeared at my
side while I lay awake a very handsome young man,
wearing a white cloak ; then, raising me to my feet,
he led me through a chasm to Hades, as I realised
at once when I saw Tantalus and Ixion and Tityus
and Sisyphus. Why should I tell you all the details?
But when I came to the court—Aeacus and Charon
and the Fates and the Furies were there—a person
resembling a king (Pluto, I suppose) sat reading off
the names of those about to die because their lease
of life chanced to have already expired. The young
man speedily set me before him; but Pluto was
angry and said to my guide: ‘ His thread is not yet
‘fully spun, so let him be off, and bring me the
blacksmith Demylus, for he is living beyond the
spindle.’ I hastened back with a joyful heart, and
from that time was free from fever ; but I told everyone that Demylus would die. He lived next door
to us, and himself had some illness, according to
report. And after a little while we heard the
wailing of his mourners.”

“What is there surprising in that?” said
Antigonus: “I know a man who came to life more
than twenty days after his burial, having attended
the fellow both before his death and after he came
to life.’ “How was it,” said I, “that in twenty
days the body neither corrupted nor simply wasted
away from inanition? Unless it was an Epimenides 
whom you attended.”

While we were exchanging these words the sons
of Eucrates came in upon us from the palaestra, one
already of age, the other about fifteen years old, and
after greeting us sat down upon the couch beside
their father ; a chair was brought in forme. Then,
as if reminded by the sight of his sons, Eucrates
said: “As surely as I hope that these boys will be a
joy to me”—and he laid his hand upon them—
“what I am about to tell you, Tychiades, is true.
Everyone knows how I loved their mother, my wife
of blessed memory ; I made it plain by what I did
for her not only while she was alive but even when
she died, for I burned on the pyre with her all the
ornaments and the clothing that she liked while she
lived. On the seventh day after her death I was
lying here on the couch, just as I am now, consoling
my grief; for I was peacefully reading Plato’s book
about the soul. While I was thus engaged,
Demaenete herself in person came in upon me and
sat down beside me, just as Eucratides here is sitting
now”—with a gesture toward the younger of his
sons, who at once shuddered in a very boyish way ;
he had already been pale for some time over the
story. ‘“When I saw her,” Eucrates continued, “I


 

caught her in my arms with a cry of grief and began
to weep. She would not permit me to cry, however,
but began to find fault with me because, although I
had given her everything else, I had not burned one
of her gilt sandals, which, she said, was under the
chest, where it had been thrown aside. That was
why we did not find it and burned only the one.
We were continuing our conversation when a cursed
toy dog that was under the couch, a Maltese, barked,
and she vanished at his barking. The sandal, however, was found under the chest and was burned
afterwards.

“Is it right, Tychiades, to doubt these apparitions
any longer, when they are distinctly seen and a
matter of daily occurrence?” “No, by Heaven,”
I said: “those who doubt and are so disrespectful
toward truth deserve to be spanked like children,
with a gilt sandal!”

At this juncture Arignotus the Pythagorean came
in, the man with the long hair and the majestic
face—you know the one who is renowned for wisdom,
whom they call holy. As I caught sight of him, I
drew a breath of relief, thinking : “There now, a
broadaxe has come to hand to use against their
lies. The wise man will stop their mouths when
they tell such prodigious yarns.” I thought that
Fortune had trundled him in to me like a deus ex
machina, as the phrase is. But when Cleodemus
had made room for him and he was seated, he first
asked about the illness, and when Eucrates told him
‘that it was already less troublesome, said : “What
were you debating among yourselves? As I came

 

in, I overheard you, and it seemed to me that you
were on the point of giving a fine turn to the conversation !” 

 
“We are only trying to persuade this man of
adamant,” said Eucrates, pointing at me, “to believe
that spirits and phantoms exist, and that souls of
dead men go about above ground and appear to
whomsoever they will.” I flushed and lowered my ©
eyes out of reverence for Arignotus. ‘“Perhaps,
Eucrates,” he said, “Tychiades means that only the
ghosts of those who died by violence walk, for example, if a man hanged himself, or had his head cut
off, or was crucified, or departed life in some similar
way; and that those of men who died a natural
death do not. If that is what he means, we cannot
altogether reject what he says.” “No, by Heaven,”
replied Deinomachus, “he thinks that such things do
not exist at all and are not seen in bodily form.”

“What is that you say?” said Arignotus, with a
sour look at me. “Do you think that none of
these things happen, although everybody, I may say,
sees them?’ “Plead in my defence,” said I,“if I
do not believe in them, that I am the only one of all
who does not see them; if I saw them, I should believe in them, of course, just as you do.” “Come,”
said he, “if ever you go to Corinth, ask where the
house of Eubatides is, and when it is pointed out to
you beside Cornel Grove, enter it and say to the doorman Tibius that you should like to see where the

 

Pythagorean Arignotus exhumed the spirit and
drove it away, making the house habitable from
that time on.

“What was that, Arignotus? asked Eucrates.
“It was uninhabitable,” he replied, “for a long time
because of terrors; whenever anyone took up his
abode in it, he fled in panic at once, chased out by a
fearful, terrifying phantom. So it was falling in and
the roof was tumbling down, and there was nobody
at all who had the courage to enter it. 

 
When I heard all this, I took my books—I have a
great number of Egyptian works about such matters—
and went into the house at bed-time, although my
host tried to'dissuade me and all but held me when
he learned where I was going—into misfortune with .
my eyes open, he thought. But taking a lamp I went
in alone; in the largest room I put down the light
and was reading peacefully, seated on the ground,
when the spirit appeared, thinking that he was
setting upon a man of the common sort and expecting to affright me as he had the others; he was
squalid and long-haired and blacker than the dark.
Standing over me, he made attempts upon me,
attacking me from all sides to see if he could get
the best of me anywhere, and turning now into a
dog, now into a bull or a lion. But I brought into
play my most frightful imprecation, speaking the’
Egyptian language, pent him up in a certain corner
of a dark room, and laid him. Then, having observed
where he went down, I slept for the rest of the
night. 

 
“In the morning, when everybody had given up
hope and expected to find me dead like the others,

 

I came forth to the surprise of all and went to
Eubatides with the good tidings that he could now
inhabit his house, which was purged and free from
terrors. So, taking him along and many of the
others too—they went wit us because the thing was
so amazing—I led them to the place where I had seen
that the spirit had gone down and told them to take
picks and shovels and dig. When they.did so, there
was found buried about six feet deep a mouldering
body of which only the bones lay together in order.
We exhumed and buried it; and the house from
that time ceased to be troubled by the phantoms.”

When Arignotus, a man of superhuman wisdom,
revered by all, told this story, there was no longer
any one of those present who did not hold me
convicted of gross folly if I doubted such things,
especially as the narrator was Arignotus. Nevertheless I did not blench either at his long hair or at
the reputation which encompassed him, but said:
“What is this, Arignotus? Were you, Truth’s only
hope, just like the rest—full of moonshine and vain
imaginings? Indeed the saying has come true: our
pot of gold has turned out to be nothing but coals.”
 

 
“Come now,” said Arignotus, “if you put no trust
either in me or in Deinomachus or Cleodemus here
or in Eucrates himself, tell whom you consider more
trustworthy in such matters that maintains the opposite view to ours.” A very wonderful man,” said I,
“that Democritus who came from Abdera, who surely


 

was thoroughly convinced that nothing of this kind
can exist. He shut himself up in a tomb outside the
gates, and constantly wrote and composed there by
night and by day. Some of the young fellows, wishing to annoy and alarm him, dressed themselves up
like dead men in black robes and masks patterned
after skulls, encircled him and danced round and
round, in quick time, leaping into the air. Yet he
neither feared their travesty nor looked up at them at
all, but as he wrote said: ‘Stop your foolery!’ So
firmly did he believe that souls are nothing after
they have gone out of their bodies.” 

 
“That,” said Eucrates, “amounts to your saying
that Democritus, too, was a foolish man, if he really
thought so.

But I will tell you another incident
derived from my own experience, not from hearsay. Perhaps even you, Tychiades, when you have
heard it, may be convinced of the truth of the
story. 

 
“When I was living in Egypt during my youth
(my father had sent me travelling for the purpose of
completing my education), I took it into my head to
sail up to Koptos and go from there to the statue of
Memnon in order to hear it sound that marvellous
salutation to the rising sun. Well, what I heard
from it was not a meaningless voice, as in the
general experience of common people ; Memnon
himself actually opened his mouth and delivered me
an oracle in seven verses, and if it were not too much
of a digression, I would have repeated the very
verses for you.

But on the voyage up, there
chanced to be sailing with us a man from Memphis,
one of the scribes ot the temple, wonderfully

 

learned, familiar with all the culture of the
Egyptians. He was said to have lived underground
for twenty-three years in their sanctuaries, learning
magic from Isis.” 

 
“You mean Pancrates,” said Arignotus, “my
own teacher, a holy man, clean shaven, in white
linen, always deep in thought, speaking imperfect
Greek, tall, flat-nosed, with protruding lips and
thinnish legs.” ‘That self-'same Pancrates,’ he
replied: “and at first I did not know who he was,
but when I saw him working all sorts of wonders
whenever we anchored the boat, particularly riding
on crocodiles and swimming in company with the
beasts, while they fawned and wagged their tails, I
recognised that he was a holy man, and by degrees,
through my friendly behaviour, I became his
companion and associate, so that he shared all his
secret knowledge with me. 

 
“At last he persuaded me to leave all my servants
behind in Memphis and to go with him quite alone,
for we should not lack people to wait upon us; and
thereafter we got on in that way.

But whenever we
came to a stopping-place, the man would take either
the bar of the door or the broom or even the pestle,
put clothes upon it, say a certain spell over it, and
make it walk, appearing to everyone else to be a man.
It would go off and draw water and buy provisions
and prepare meals and in every way deftly serve and
wait upon us. Then, when he was through with its

 

services, he would again make the broom a broom or
the pestle a pestle by saying another spell over it. 

 
“Though I was very keen to learn this from him,
I could not do so, for he was jealous, although most
ready to oblige in everything else. But one day I
secretly overheard the spell—it was just three
syllables—by taking my stand in a dark place. He
went off to the square after telling the pestle what it
had to do,

and on the next day, while he was
transacting some business in the square, I took the
pestle, dressed it up in the same way, said the
syllables over it, and told it to carry water. When
it had filled and brought in the jar, I said, ‘Stop!
don’t carry any more water : be a pestle again!’ But
it would not obey me now: it kept straight on
carrying until it filled the house with water for us by
pouring it in! At my wit’s end over the thing, for
I feared that Pancrates might come back and be
angry, as was indeed the case, I took an axe and cut
the pestle in two ; but each part took a jar and began
to carry water, with the result that instead of one
servant I had now two. Meanwhile Pancrates
appeared on the scene, and comprehending what
had happened, turned them into wood again, just as
they were before the spell, and then for his own
part left me to my own devices without warning,
taking himself off out of sight somewhere.” 

 
“Then you still know how to turn the pestle into
a man?” said Deinomachus. “Yes,’ said he:
“only half way, however, for I cannot bring it back
to its original form if it once becomes a water-


 

carrier, but we shall be obliged to let the house be
flooded with the water that is poured in!”

“Will you never stop telling such buncombe, old
men as you are?” said I. “If you will not, at
least for the sake of these lads put your amazing
and fearful tales off to some other time, so that they
may not be filled up with terrors and strange
figments before we realise it. You ought to be easy
with them and not accustom them to hear things
like this which will abide with them and annoy them
their lives long and will make them afraid of every
sound by filling them with all sorts of superstition.”

“Thank you,’ said Eucrates, “for putting me in
‘mind of superstition by mentioning it. What is
your opinion, Tychiades, about that sort of thing—
I mean oracles, prophecies, outcries of men under
divine possession, voices heard from inner shrines, or
verses uttered by a maiden who foretells the future?
Of course you doubt that sort of thing also? For
my own part, I say nothing of the fact that I have a
holy ring with an image of Apollo Pythius engraved
on the seal, and that this Apollo speaks to me:
you might think that I was bragging about myself
beyond belief. I should like, however, to tell you
all what I heard from Amphilochus in Mallus, when
the hero conversed with me in broad day and
advised me about my affairs, and what I myself saw,
and then in due order what I saw at Pergamon and .
what I heard at Patara.


 
 

 
“When I was on my way home from Egypt I
heard that this shrine in Mallus was very famous and
very trathful, and that it responded clearly, answering word for word whatever one wrote in his tablet
and turned over to the prophet. So I thought that it
would be well to give the oracle a trial in passing and
ask the god for some advice about the future—”

While Eucrates was still saying these words, since
I could see how the business would turn out and that
the cock-and-bull story about oracles upon which he
was embarking would not be short, I left him sailing
from Egypt to Mallus, not choosing to oppose everyone all alone: I was aware, too, that they were put
out at my being there to criticise their lies. “I am
going away,” I said, “to look up Leontichus, for I
want to speak to him about something. As for you,
since you do not think that human experiences afford
you a sufficient field, go ahead and call in the gods
themselves to help you out in your romancing.”
With that I went out. They were glad to have a
free hand, and continued, of course, to feast and to
gorge themselves with lies. 

 
There you have it, Philocles! After hearing all
that at the house of Eucrates I am going about like
a man who has drunk sweet must, with a swollen
belly, craving an emetic. I should be glad if I
could anywhere buy at a high price a dose of forgetfulness, so that the memory of what I heard may not
stay with me and work me some harm. In fact, I
think I see apparitions and spirits and Hecates!

PHILOCLES 
Your story has had the same enjoyable effect upon
me, Tychiades. They say, you know, that not only
those who are bitten by mad dogs go mad and fear
water, but if a man who has been bitten bites anyone
else, his bite has the same effect as the dog’s, and the
other man has the same fears. It is likely, therefore,
that having been bitten yourself by a multitude of
lies in the house of Eucrates, you have passed the bite
on to me; you have filled my soul so full of spirits !
 
 TYCHIADES 
Well, never mind; my dear fellow; we have a
powerful antidote to such poisons in truth and in
sound reason brought to bear everywhere. As long
as we make use of this, none of these empty, foolish
lies will disturb our peace.