INTRODUCTION 
					 The brief essay To an Uneducated Ruler may have formed part of a lecture, or
						it may, as its traditional title suggests, have been composed as a letter to
						some person in authority. There is nothing in it to prove either assumption.
						No striking or unusual precepts or doctrines are here promulgated, but the
						essay is enlivened by a few interesting tales and, considering its brevity,
						by a somewhat unusual number of rather elaborate similes. As usual Plutarch
						depends upon earlier writers for most of his material. The ending is so
						abrupt as to warrant the belief that the essay, in its present form, is only
						a fragment.

Plato was asked by the Cyrenaeans to compose a set of laws and leave it
						for them and to give them a well-ordered government; but he refused, saying
						that it was difficult to make laws for the Cyrenaeans because they were so
						prosperous. For nothing is so haughty 
						harsh, and ungovernable by nature as a man, 
						 when he possesses what he regards as prosperity. And that is why it
						is difficult to give advice to rulers in matters of government, for they are
						afraid to accept reason as a ruler over them, lest it curtail the advantage
						of their power by making them slaves to duty. For they are not familiar with
						the saying of Theopompus, the King of Sparta who first made the Ephors associates
						of the Kings; then, when his wife reproached him because he would hand down
						to his children a less powerful office than that which he had received he
						said: Nay, more powerful rather, inasmuch as it is
							more secure. For by giving up that which was excessive and absolute
						in it he avoided both the envy and the danger. And
						yet Theopompus, by diverting to a different body the vast stream of his
						royal authority, deprived himself of as much as he gave to others. But when
						philosophical reason derived from philosophy has been established as the
						ruler's coadjutor and guardian, it removes the hazardous element from his
						power, as a surgeon removes that which threatens a patient's health and
						leaves that which is sound.

But most kings and rulers are so foolish as to act like unskilful sculptors,
						who think their colossal figures look large and imposing if they are
						modelled with their feet far apart, their muscles tense, and their mouths
						wide open. For these rulers seem by heaviness of voice, harshness of
						expression, truculence of manner, and unsociability in their way of living
						to be imitating the dignity and majesty of the princely station, although in
						fact they are not at all different from colossal statues which have a heroic
						and godlike form on the outside, but inside are full of clay, stone, and
						lead, - except that in the case of the statues the weight of those
						substances keeps them permanently upright without leaning, whereas
						uneducated generals and rulers are often rocked and capsized by the
						ignorance within them; for since the foundation upon which they have built
						up their lofty power is not laid straight, they lean with it and lose their
						balance. But just as a rule, if it is made rigid and inflexible, makes other
						things straight when they are fitted to it and laid alongside it, in like
						manner the sovereign must first gain command of himself, must regulate his
						own soul and establish his own character, then make his subjects fit his pattern. For one who is falling cannot hold
						others up, nor can one who is ignorant teach, nor the uncultivated impart
						culture, nor the disorderly make order, nor can he rule who is under no
						rule. But most people foolishly believe that the first advantage of ruling
						is freedom from being ruled. And indeed the King of the Persians used to
						think that everyone was a slave except his own wife, whose master he ought
						to have been most of all.

Who, then, shall rule the ruler? The 
							 Law, the king of all, 
							 Both mortals and immortals, 
						 as Pindar says - not law
						written outside him in books or on wooden tablets or
						the like, but reason endowed with life within him, always abiding with him
						and watching over him and never leaving his soul without its leadership. For
						example, the King of the Persians had one of his chamberlains assigned to
						the special duty of entering his chamber in the morning and saying to him:
							 Arise, O King, and consider matters which the
							great Oromasdes wished you to consider. 
						But the educated and wise ruler has within him the voice which always thus
						speaks to him and exhorts him. Indeed Polemo said that love was the service of the gods for the care and preservation
							of the young ; one might more truly say that rulers serve god for
						the care and preservation of men, in order that of
						the glorious gifts which the gods give to men they may distribute some and
						safeguard others. 
							 Dost thou behold this lofty, boundless sky 
							 Which holds the earth enwrapped in soft embrace? 
							 
						 The sky sends down the beginnings of the appropriate seeds, and the
						earth causes them to sprout up; some are made to grow by showers and some
						by winds, and some by the warmth of stars and moon; but it is the sun which
						adorns all things and mingles in all things what men call the love charm which is derived from himself. But
						these gifts and blessings, so excellent and so great, which the gods bestow
						cannot be rightly enjoyed nor used without law and justice and a ruler. Now
						justice is the aim and end of law, but law is the work of the ruler, and the
						ruler is the image of God who orders all things. Such a ruler needs no
						Pheidias nor Polycleitus nor Myron to model him, but by his virtue he forms
						himself in the likeness of God and thus creates a statue most delightful of
						all to behold and most worthy of divinity. Now just as in the heavens God
						has established as a most beautiful image of himself the sun and the moon,
						so in states a ruler 
							 who in God's likeness 
							 Righteous decisions upholds, 
							 
						 that is to say, one who, possessing god's wisdom, establishes, as
						his likeness and luminary, intelligence in place of sceptre or thunderbolt
						or trident, with which attributes some rulers represent themselves in sculpture and painting, thus causing their folly
						to arouse hostile feelings, because they claim what they cannot attain. For
						God visits his wrath upon those who imitate his thunders, lightnings, and
						sunbeams, but with those who emulate his virtue and make themselves like
						unto his goodness and mercy he is well pleased and therefore causes them to
						prosper and gives them a share of his own equity, justice, truth, and
						gentleness, than which nothing is more divine, - nor fire, nor light, nor
						the course of the sun, nor the risings and settings of the stars, nor
						eternity and immortality. For God enjoys felicity, not through the length of
						his life, but through the ruling quality of his virtue; for this is divine;
						and excellent also is that part of virtue which submits to rule.

Now it is true that Anaxarchus, trying to console Alexander in his agony of
						mind over his killing of Cleitus, said that the reason why Justice and Right
						are seated by the side of Zeus is
						that men may consider every act of a king as righteous and just; but neither
						correct nor helpful were the means he took in endeavouring to heal the
						king's remorse for his sin, by encouraging him to further acts of the same
						sort. But if a guess about this matter is proper, I should say that Zeus
						does not have Justice to sit beside him, but is himself Justice and Right
						and the oldest and most perfect of laws; but the ancients state it in that
						way in their writings and teachings, to imply that without Justice not even
						Zeus can rule well. She is a virgin, according to
							Hesiod, uncorrupted, dwelling with reverence, self-restraint, and helpfulness;
						and therefore kings are called reverend, 
						 for it is fitting that those be most
						revered who have least to fear. But the ruler should have more fear of doing
						than of suffering evil; for the former is the cause of the latter; and
						that kind of fear on the part of the ruler is humane and not ignoble to be
						afraid on behalf of his subjects lest they may without his knowledge suffer
						harm, 
							 Just as the dogs keep their watch, toiling hard for the flocks in the
								sheepfold, 
							 When they have heard a ferocious wild beast, 
							 
						 not for their own sake but for the sake of those whom they are
						guarding. Epameinondas, when all the Thebans crowded to a certain festival
						and gave themselves up utterly to drink, went alone and patrolled the
						armouries and the walls, saying that he was keeping sober and awake that the
						others might be free to be drunk and asleep. And Cato at Utica issued a
						proclamation to send all the other survivors of the defeat to the seashore;
						he saw them aboard ship, prayed that they might have a good voyage, then
						returned home and killed himself; thereby teaching us in whose behalf the
						ruler ought to feel fear and what the ruler ought to despise. But Clearchus,
						tyrant of Pontus, used to crawl into a chest like a snake and sleep there,
						and Aristodemus of Argos would mount to an upper room entered by a
						trap-door, then put his bed on the door and sleep in it with his mistress;
						and the girl's mother would take the ladder away from below and set it up
						again in the morning. How do you imagine he must
						have shuddered at the theatre, the city hall, the senate - chamber, the
						convivial feast, he who had made his bedchamber a prison cell? For in
						reality kings fear for their subjects, but tyrants fear their subjects; and
						therefore they increase their fear as they increase their power, for when
						they have more subjects they have more men to fear.

For it is neither probable nor fitting that god is, as some philosophers say,
						mingled with matter, which is altogether passive, and with things, which are
						subject to countless necessities, chances, and changes. On the contrary,
						somewhere up above in contact with that nature which, in accordance with the
						same principles, remains always as it is, established, as Plato says, upon
						pedestals of holiness, proceeding in accordance with nature in his straight
						course, he reaches his goal. And as the sun, his most beautiful
						image, appears in the heavens as his mirrored likeness to those who are able
						to see him in it, just so he has established in states the light of justice
						and of knowledge of himself as an image which the blessed and the wise copy
						with the help of philosophy, modelling themselves after the most beautiful
						of all things. But nothing implants this disposition in men except the
						teachings of philosophy, to keep us from having the same experience as
						Alexander, who, seeing Diogenes at Corinth, admiring him for his natural
						gifts, and being astonished by his spirit and greatness, said: If I were not Alexander, I should be Diogenes, by
							 which he almost said that he was weighed down
						by his good fortune, glory, and power which kept him from virtue and left
						him no leisure, and that he envied the cynic's cloak and wallet because
						Diogenes was invincible and secure against capture by means of these, not,
						as he was himself, by means of arms, horses, and pikes. So by being a
						philosopher he was able to become Diogenes in disposition and yet to remain
						Alexander in outward fortunes, and to become all the more Diogenes because
						he was Alexander, since for his great ship of fortune, tossed by high winds
						and surging sea, he needed heavy ballast and a great pilot.

For in weak and lowly private persons folly is combined with lack of power
						and, therefore, results in no wrongdoing, just as in bad dreams a feeling of
						distress disturbs the spirit, and it cannot rouse itself in accordance with
						its desires; but power when wickedness is added to it brings increased
						vigour to the passions. For the saying of Dionysius is true; he said,
						namely, that he enjoyed his power most when he did quickly what he wished.
						There is indeed great danger that he who can do what he wishes may wish what
						he ought not to do: Straightway then was the word,
							and the deed was forthwith accomplished. 
						 Wickedness, when by reason of power it possesses rapid speed,
						forces every passion to emerge, making of anger murder, of love adultery, of
						covetousness confiscation. 
						 Straightway then was the word, and the
						offender is done away with; suspicion arises, the man who is slandered is
						put to death. But as the physicists say that the lightning breaks forth
						later than the thunder, as the flowing of blood is later than the wound, but
						is seen sooner, since the hearing waits for the sound, whereas the sight
						goes to meet the light; so in governments punishments come before the
						accusations and convictions are pronounced before the proofs are given.
							 
							 For now the spirit yields and holds no longer firm, 
							 As yields the anchor's fluke in sand when waves are high, 
							 
						 unless the weight of reason presses upon power and holds it down,
						and the ruler imitates the sun, which, when it mounts up in the northern sky
						and reaches its greatest altitude, has the least motion, thus by greater
						slowness ensuring the safety of its course.

Nor is it possible in positions of power for vices to be concealed.
						Epileptics, if they go up to a high place and move about, grow dizzy and
						reel, which makes their disease evident, and just so Fortune by such things
						as riches, reputations, or offices exalts uneducated and uncultured men a
						little and then, as soon as they have risen high, gives them a conspicuous
						fall; or, to use a better simile, just as in a number of vessels you could
						not tell which is whole and which is defective, but when you pour liquid
						into them the leak appears, just so corrupt souls cannot contain power, but
						leak out in acts of desire, anger, imposture, and bad taste. But what is the
						use of saying these things, when even the slightest
						short-comings in men of conspicuous reputation are made the subject of
						calumny? Too much wine caused slander against Cimon, too much sleep against
						Scipio, Lucullus was ill spoken of because his dinners were too expensive.
						..