INTRODUCTION 
 	 The essay on listening to lectures was first delivered
					as a formal lecture, and afterwards written out for
					the benefit of the young Nicander, who had just
					assumed the toga virilis , and was about to take up
					the serious study of philosophy. One can see in
					Terence, Andria , i. 1. 24, for example, how the young
					men of good family, suddenly released from the care
					of tutors by assuming the toga virilis , conventionally
					took up a more or less serious avocation. Some
					took to horses or hunting, while others went on to
					the higher studies. 
 It must be quite evident that this essay is, in a
					way, a supplement and corollary to the preceding
					essay on the study of poetry. The former is concerned with the young, the latter with the more
					mature who are undertaking serious study, and
					particularly the study of philosophy, in which
					Plutarch was intensely interested. But it is quite
					clear that the lectures to which he refers dealt with
					many other subjects besides philosophy. 
 The essay has an astonishingly modern tone.
					The different types of students — the diffident
					student, the lazy student, the contemptuous student,
					the over-enthusiastic student who makes a nuisance
					of himself, the over-confident student who likes to
					ask questions to show off his own scrappy knowledge,
					
					 
					
					the student who has no appreciation of his privilege
					in hearing a great scholar—all these are portrayed
					in a thoroughly realistic manner. 
 Stress is laid on the great contrast between the
					scholar (particularly the philosopher) and the
					popular lecturer (the sophist). Then as now, it
					seems, people were not always willing to listen
					patiently to the scholar, but more often inclined to
					resort to lectures of the lighter and more entertaining
					sort. In this matter, as in many others, Plutarch
					marks the distinction of character—the character of
					the lecturer, and the effect of the lecture on the
					character of the hearer. The sophists, having no
					particular character themselves and being below the
					general average of mankind, can do little or nothing
					to improve the character of their hearers, but, on
					the other hand, practically everything that the
					scholar says or does has its value for the upbuilding
					of character if only one have the ability to profit
					by it. 
 Proper behaviour in the lecture-room is the main
					theme of the essay. No lecture can be so bad
					that it contains nothing good, and while the
					lecture itself must be subjected to unsparing
					criticism, the lecturer must always be treated with
					kindly consideration, and must not be disturbed
					by any improper behaviour on the part of his
					audience. 
 It is worth while to compare Pliny's Letters , vi. 17
					and i. 13 for the record of certain improprieties
					committed by audiences in Rome. On the general
					subject of higher education and the wide diffusion
					of knowledge at this time and later, reference may
					be made to W. W. Capes, University Life in Ancient
					
					 
					
					Athens , and J. W. H. Walden, The Universities of
					Ancient Greece (New York, 1909). 
 In the catalogue of Lamprias, in which this essay
					is No. 102, the title is given as Περὶ τοῦ ἀκούειν
						τῶν φιλοσόφον , On Listening to the Lectures of
							Philosophers, but it is probable that this title is
					merely explanatory, for Plutarch himself uses
					 ἀκούειν alone in this sense in the very first line of
					the essay.

The discourse which I gave on the subject of
					listening to lectures I have written out and sent to
					you, my dear Nicander, so that you may know how
					rightly to listen to the voice of persuasion, now that
					you are no longer subject to authority, having
					assumed the garb of a man. Now absence of control,
					which some of the young men, for want of education,
					think to be freedom, establishes the sway of a set of
					masters, harsher than the teachers and attendants
					of childhood, in the form of the desires, which are
					now, as it were, unchained. And just as Herodotus 
					says that women put off their modesty along with
					their undergarments, so some of our young men, as
					soon as they lay aside the garb of childhood, lay
					aside also their sense of modesty and fear, and,
					undoing the habit that invests them, straightway
					become full of unruliness. But you have often heard
					that to follow God and to obey reason are the same
					tiling, and so I ask you to believe that in persons
					of good sense the passing from childhood to manhood
					is not a casting off of control, but a recasting of the
					controlling agent, since instead of some hired person
					or slave purchased with money they now take as
					the divine guide of their life reason, whose followers
					alone may deservedly be considered free. For
					they alone, having learned to wish for what they
					
					 
					
					ought, live as they wish; but in untrained and
					irrational impulses and actions there is something
					ignoble, and changing one's mind many times
					involves but little freedom of will.

We may find a comparison in the case of newly
					naturalized citizens; those among them who were
					alien born and perfect strangers find fault with many
					of the things that are done, and are discontented;
					whereas those who come from the class of resident
					aliens, having been brought up under our laws and
					grown to be well acquainted with them, have no
					difficulty in accepting what devolves upon them and
					are content. And so you, who have been brought
					up for a long time in contact with philosophy, and
					have from the beginning been accustomed to
					philosophic reasoning as an ingredient in every
					portion of early instruction and information, ought
					to feel like an old friend and familiar when you come
					to philosophy, which alone can array young men in
					the manly and truly perfect adornment that comes
					from reason.
					I think you may not find unwelcome some preliminary remarks about the sense of hearing, which
					Theophrastus asserts is the most emotional of all
					the senses. For nothing which can be seen or tasted
					or touched brings on such distractions, confusions,
					and excitements, as take possession of the soul when
					certain crashing, clashing, and roaring noises assail the
					hearing. Yet this sense is more rational than
					emotional. For while many places and parts of the
					body make way for vice to enter through them and
					fasten itself upon the soul, virtue's only hold upon
					the young is afforded by the ears, if they be uncontaminated and kept from the outset unspoiled by
					
					 
					
					flattery and untouched by vile words. For this
					reason Xenocrates advised putting ear-protectors
					on children rather than on athletes, on the ground
					that the latter have only their ears disfigured by the
					blows they receive, while the former have their
					characters disfigured by the words they hear; not
					that he would thus court heedlessness or deafness,
					but he advises vigilance against vile words, until such
					time as other words, of good sort, fostered in the
					character by philosophy, should, like watchmen,
					have taken under their charge the post chiefly
					exposed to influence and persuasion. And Bias of
					old, on receiving orders to send to Amasis the portion
					of the sacrificial animal which was at the same time
					the best and the worst, cut out the tongue and sent
					it to him, on the ground that speech contains both
					injuries and benefits in the largest measure. Most
					people in bestowing an affectionate kiss on little
					children not only take hold of the children by the
					ears but bid the children to do the same by them,
					thus insinuating in a playful way that they must love
					most those who confer benefit through the ears.
					For surely the fact is plain, that the young man who
					is debarred from hearing all instruction and gets no
					taste of speech not only remains wholly unfruitful
					and makes no growth towards virtue, but may also
					be perverted towards vice, and the product of his
					mind, like that of a fallow and untilled piece of
					ground, will be a plentiful crop of wild oats. For
					if the impulses towards pleasure and the feelings
					of suspicion towards hard work (which are not of
					external origin nor imported products of the spoken
					word, but indigenous sources, as it were, of pestilent
					emotions and disorders without number) be allowed to
					
					 
					
					continue unconstrained along their natural channels,
					and if they be not either removed or diverted
					another way through the agency of goodly discourse,
					thus putting the natural endowments in a fit condition, there is not one of the wild beasts but would
					be found more civilized than man.

Therefore, since listening to lectures is attended
					by great benefit, but by no less danger, to the young,
					I think it is a good thing to discuss the matter
					continually both with oneself and with another
					person. The reason for so doing is because we
					observe that a poor use is made of this by the great
					majority of persons, who practise speaking before
					they have acquired the habit of listening. They
					think that there must be study and practice in
					discourse, but as for hearing, benefit will come
					however it be used. It is true that, in the case of
					persons playing ball, learning to throw and learning
					to catch take place at the same time; but in the use
					of discourse its proper reception comes before its
					delivery, just as conception and pregnancy come
					before parturition. It is said that when fowls labour
					and bring forth wind-eggs, these result from some
					imperfect and infertile residue from conception;
					and if young men have not the power to listen, or
					the habit of getting some profit through listening, the
					speech brought forth by them is windy indeed, and
					 Void of repute and unheeded beneath the clouds
						it is scattered. 
 
					For although they can incline and turn vessels
					properly to receive any liquid which is being poured
					into them, in order that there may actually be a
					filling and not a spilling, they never learn to apply
					themselves to a speaker and to accord attention to
					
					 
					
					his lecture so that none of its good points may escape
					them. But here is the most ridiculous thing in the
					world: if they chance upon somebody who is giving
					an account of a dinner or a procession or a dream or
					a wordy brawl which he has had with another man,
					they listen in silence, and importune him to continue;
					yet if anybody draws them to one side and tries to
					impart something useful, or to advise them of some
					duty, or to admonish them when in the wrong, or to
					mollify them when incensed, they have no patience
					with him; but, eager to get the better of him if they
					can, they fight against what he says, or else they beat
					a hasty retreat in search of other foolish talk, filling
					their ears like worthless and rotten vessels with
					anything rather than the things they need. As
					skilful horse-trainers give us horses with a good
					mouth for the bit, so too skilful educators give us
					children with a good ear for speech, by teaching them
					to hear much and speak little. Indeed, Spintharus a
					declared in commendation of Epameinondas that it
					was not easy to find a man who knew more and
					spoke less. And it is a common saying that nature
					has given to each of us two ears and one tongue,
					because we ought to do less talking than listening.

In all cases, then, silence is a safe adornment
					for the young man, and especially so, when in
					listening to another he does not get excited or bawl
					out every minute, but even if the remarks be none
					too agreeable, puts up with them, and waits for the
					speaker to pause, and, when the pause comes, does
					not at once interpose his objection, but, as Aeschines
					puts b it, allows an interval to elapse, in case the
					 
					
					 
					
					speaker may desire to add something to what he has
					said, or to alter or unsay anything. But those who
					instantly interrupt with contradictions, neither hearing nor being heard, but talking while others talk,
					behave in an unseemly manner; whereas the man
					who has the habit of listening with restraint and
					respect, takes in and masters a useful discourse, and
					more readily sees through and detects a useless or
					false one, showing himself thus to be a lover of truth
					and not a lover of disputation, nor froward and
					contentious. Wherefore it is sometimes said not
					unaptly that it is even more necessary to take the
					wind of self-opinion and conceit out of the young,
					than to deflate wine-skins, if you wish to fill them
					with something useful; otherwise, being full of
					bombast and inflation, they have no room to receive it.

Now the presence of envy, attended by malice
					and hostility, is not a good thing for any undertaking,
					but it stands in the way of all that is honourable;
					and it is the very worst associate and counsellor for
					one that would listen to a lecture, inasmuch as it
					makes what is profitable to be vexatious, unpleasing,
					and unacceptable, because envious persons are
					pleased with anything rather than with the good
					points of a discourse. Now the man that is stung
					by the wealth, or repute, or beauty possessed by
					another, is merely envious; for he is depressed by
					the good fortune of others; but one who feels
					discontentment at an excellent discourse is vexed by
					what is for his own good. For just as light is a good
					thing for those who can see, so is discourse for those
					who can hear, if they be willing to receive it.
					Now while envy in other matters is engendered
					by certain untrained and evil dispositions of a man,
					
					 
					
					the envy that is directed against a speaker is the
					offspring of an unseasonable desire for repute and a
					dishonest ambition, and it does not suffer the person
					in such a mood even to pay attention to what is
					being said, but it confuses and distracts his mind
					which at one moment is engaged in reviewing its
					own condition to see whether it be inferior to that of
					the speaker, then anon it turns to dwell on the other
					persons present to see whether they are showing
					any pleasure or admiration; it is disconcerted by
					their approval, and irritated at the audience if they
					find the speaker acceptable; disregards and dismisses the part of the discourse already delivered
					because the memory of it is painful, but for what
					still remains trembles with anxiety lest that part
					prove better than the part already delivered; eager
					that the speakers may most quickly have done when
					they are speaking most excellently; and when the
					lecture is over, it does not ponder upon any point
					of the discussion, but proceeds to count as votes the
					comments and attitudes of those present; if any
					approve, fleeing and recoiling from these as though
					frantic; if any disapprove or distort the things said,
					hastening to join their company; and if it be impossible to distort, then it falls to making comparisons
					with others who could have spoken better and more
					forcibly to the same purport—until by spoiling and
					maltreating the lecture it has succeeded in making
					the whole thing useless and unprofitable to itself.

Therefore a man must let his desire to hear
					make truce with his desire for repute, and listen
					cheerfully and affably as though he were a guest at
					some dinner or ceremonial banquet, commending
					the speaker's ability in those parts wherein he
					
					 
					
					achieves a success, and favourably accepting the goodwill, if nothing else, of the speaker who propounds
					his opinions and tries to persuade others by the
					reasons which have persuaded himself. Where he
					is successful we must reflect that the success is not
					due to chance or accident, but to care, diligence, and
					study, and herein we should try to imitate him in a
					spirit of admiration and emulation; but where there
					are mistakes, we should direct our intelligence to
					these, to determine the reasons and origin of the
					error. For as Xenophon asserts that good householders derive benefit both from their friends and
					from their enemies, so in the same way do speakers,
					not only when they succeed, but also when they fail,
					render a service to hearers who are alert and attentive. For poverty of thought, emptiness of phrase,
					an offensive bearing, fluttering excitement combined
					with a vulgar delight at commendation, and the like,
					are more apparent to us in others when we are
					listening than in ourselves when we are speakers.
					Wherefore we ought to transfer our scrutiny from
					the speaker to ourselves, and examine whether we
					unconsciously commit such mistakes. For it is the
					easiest thing in the world to find fault with one's
					neighbour, and also a useless and inane proceeding
					unless it be applied in some way to correcting or
					avoiding similar faults. And everyone ought to be
					ready ever to repeat to himself, as he observes the
					faults of others, the utterance of Plato, 
 Am I not
						possibly like them ? For as we see our own eyes
					brightly reflected in the eyes of those near us, so
					we must get a picture of our own discourses in the
					discourses of others, that we may not too rashly
					
					
					 
					
					disdain others, and may give more careful attention
					to ourselves in the matter of speaking. To this end
					the process of comparison is useful, if, when we have
					come away from the lecture and are by ourselves,
					we take some topic that seems to have been ineffectually or inadequately treated, and try our hand
					at the same thing, and address ourselves to supplying
					a deficiency here, or amending there, to saying the
					same thing in other words, or attempting to treat
					the subject in a wholly new way; and this is what
					Plato actually did for the discourse of Lysias.
					For to offer objections against a discourse which
					has been delivered is not difficult, but very easy; but
					to set up a better against it is a very laborious task.
					As the Spartan said, on hearing that Philip had
					razed the city of Olynthus to the ground, Yes, but
						even he could not possibly set up such another. 
					Whenever, therefore, in discoursing thus upon a
					given subject, we find that we do not much excel
					those who have already spoken, we abate much of
					our disdain, and our presumption and self-esteem
					are very speedily cut short by being put to the test
					in such comparisons.

Now admiration, which is the antithesis of
					disdain, obviously betokens a kindlier and gentler
					nature, but even this requires certainly no little
					caution, perhaps even more. For while it is true
					that disdainful and self-confident persons are less
					apt to get benefit from the speakers, yet the
					enthusiastic and ingenuous are more apt to get harm;
					and they cause no one to question the saying of
					Heracleitus, that A fool is wont to be agog at
						
						
						 
						
						every word that's said. In praising a speaker we
					must be generous, but in believing his words cautious;
					as touching the style and the delivery of the performers, we should observe with a kindly and simple
					mind; but as for the utility and the truth of what
					they say, we must play the keen and heartless
					critics, that the speakers may feel no hatred, yet
					their words may do no harm. For we unwittingly
					receive into our minds a great many false and vicious
					doctrines by feeling goodwill and confidence towards
					the speakers. Upon a time the Spartan officials,
					after approving the proposal made by a man whose
					life had not been good, appointed another man of
					good repute in his life and character to present it,
					thus quite rightly and for the good of the State
					trying to accustom the people to being influenced
					more by the behaviour than by the speech of their
					counsellors. But in a philosophic discussion we
					must set aside the repute of the speaker, and
					examine what he says quite apart. For as in war so
					also in lectures there is plenty of empty show.
					For example, a speaker's grey hair, his formality, his
					serious brow, his self-assertion, and above all the
					clamour and shouting of the audience as he brings
					them to their feet, combine to disconcert the young
					and inexperienced listener, who is, as it were, swept
					away by the current. The speaker's style also has a
					spice of deception when it is pleasing and copious, and
					is applied to the subject with dignity and artfulness.
					For as most of the mistakes of persons singing to
					the flute escape the audience, so an exuberant and
					impressive style flashed upon the listener blinds him
					to the matter set forth. It seems to have been
					Melanthius, who being asked about Diogenes'
					
					 
					
					tragedy, said he could not get a sight of it, there were
					so many words in the way; and the discussions and
					exercises of most popular lecturers not only use
					words to conceal their thoughts, but they so sweeten
					their voice by certain harmonious modulations and
					softenings and rhythmic cadences, as to ravish away
					and transport their hearers. It is an empty pleasure
					they give, and an even more empty renown they
					acquire, so that the remark of Dionysius fits their
					case exactly. For he, as it appears, at some performance promised to a harp-player of great repute
					certain large gifts, but afterwards gave him nothing,
					on the ground that he had already discharged his
					obligation. For, said he, all the time that you
						were giving pleasure to us with your singing, you
						were enjoying the pleasure of your hopes. And
					this is just the meed that such lectures have for those
					who deliver them; for the speakers are admired in
					as far as they are entertaining, and afterwards, no
					sooner has the pleasure of listening passed away,
					than their repute deserts them, and so the time of
					their hearers and the life of the speakers is simply
					wasted.

One ought therefore to strip off the superfluity
					and inanity from the style, and to seek after the
					fruit itself, imitating not women that make garlands,
					but the bees. For those women, culling flowerclusters and sweet-scented leaves, intertwine and
					plait them, and produce something which is pleasant
					enough, but short-lived and fruitless; whereas
					the bees in their flight frequently pass through
					meadows of violets, roses, and hyacinths, and come
					to rest upon the exceeding rough and pungent
					thyme, and on this they settle close,
					
					 
					
					 Making the yellow honey their care, 
 
					and when they have got something of use, they fly
					away home to their own special work. In such wise,
					then, the sincere and single-minded student ought
					to regard flowery and dainty language and theatrical
					and spectacular subject matter as the pasturage of
					drones who practise the popular lecture; these he
					should leave alone and use all diligence to sound
					the deep meaning of the words and the intention of
					the speaker, drawing from it what is useful and
					profitable, and remembering that he has not come
					to a theatre or music-hall, but to a school and classroom with the purpose of amending his life by what
					is there said. Hence it follows that in making his
					examination and forming his judgement of the lecture
					he should begin with himself and his own state of
					mind, endeavouring to estimate whether any one
					of his emotions has become less intense, whether any
					one of his troubles weighs less heavily upon him,
					whether his confidence and his high purpose have
					become firmly rooted, whether he has acquired
					enthusiasm for virtue and goodness. As a matter
					of course, when he rises to leave the barber's shop,
					he stands by the mirror and feels his head, examining
					the cut of his hair and the difference made by its
					trimming; so on his way home from a lecture or an
					academic exercise, it would be a shame not to direct
					his gaze forthwith upon himself and to note carefully
					his own spirit, whether it has put from it any of its
					encumbrances and superfluities, and has become
					lighter and more cheerful. For, as Ariston says,
					 neither a bath nor a discourse is of any use unless
						it removes impurity.

Let the young man, then, find pleasure when
					
					 
					
					he finds profit from a discourse; but he should not
					hold that the pleasure derived from the lecture is
					an end in itself, nor would I have him hum a merry
					note or show a jovial face as he leaves the philosopher's
					school, any more than he should seek to be sprinkled
					with perfume when he needs a fomentation and a
					hot poultice; but he should feel grateful if by
					pungent discourse someone has cleansed his mind
					teeming with fogginess and dullness, as a beehive is
					cleared by smoke. For even though it is quite right
					for a speaker not to be altogether neglectful of
					pleasantness and persuasion in his style, yet the
					young man should make least concern of this, at any
					rate at first. Afterwards no doubt he may have an
					eye to that; for just as those who drink, after they
					have quenched their thirst, begin then to observe the
					ornamentation of the drinking-cups and to turn them
					about, so the young man, when he is well replenished
					with doctrines and has some respite, may be allowed
					to inspect the style to see whether it contains anything elegant and exquisite. But he who at the
					very outset does not stick to the subject matter, but
					insists that the style shall be pure Attic and severely
					plain, is like the man who is unwilling to swallow an
					antidote for a poison unless the cup be of the finest
					Attic ware, or unwilling to put on an overcoat in
					winter unless the wool be from Attic sheep, but must
					needs sit still and inactive, with a delicate thin
					jacket of Lysias's language cast over him. Indeed,
					this sort of unhealthiness has produced much barrenness of mind and of good sense, much foolery and
					bibble-babble in the schools, since younger men do
					not keep in view the life, the actions, and the public
					conduct of a man who follows philosophy, but rate
					
					 
					
					as matters for commendation points of style and
					phrasing, and a fine delivery, while as for what is
					being delivered, whether it be useful or useless,
					whether essential or empty and superfluous, they
					neither understand nor wish to inquire.

This leads up to the matter of proposing
					problems. Now the person who comes to a dinner
					is bound to eat what is set before him and not to ask
					for anything else or to be critical; so he who comes
					to a feast of reason, if it be on a specified subject,
					must feel bound to listen to the speaker in silence.
					For those persons who lead the speaker to digress to
					other topics, and interject questions, and raise new
					difficulties, are not pleasant or agreeable company at
					a lecture; they get no benefit from it, and they
					confuse both the speaker and his speech. However,
					when the speaker requests his hearers to ask questions
					or to propose problems, one should always manifestly
					propose some problem which is useful and essential.
					Now Odysseus among the suitors is derided for
					 Asking for morsels of food and not for
						swords or for cauldrons, 
 
					for they regard it just as much a sign of magnanimity
					to ask for something great as to give it. But there
					is more reason for ridiculing a hearer who diverts
					the speaker to petty and frivolous problems, such as
					some of the young men are in the habit of proposing
					when they are only fooling and withal showing off
					their skill in logic or mathematics; take, for example,
					the question about the division of indeterminate
					propositions or What is movement as determined
						by the bounding side or by the diagonal ? 
 To such
					 
					
					 
					
					persons we may retort with the remark of Philotimus 
					to the man who was dying of consumption. When he
					had addressed the physician, asking him for something
					to cure a sore finger, Philotimus, perceiving his condition from his colour and respiration, said, My dear
						sir, your concern is not about a sore finger. And so
					for you, young man, it is not the time to be inquiring
					about such questions, but how you may be rid of
					self-opinion and pretension, love affairs and nonsense,
					and settle down to a modest and wholesome mode
					of living.

It is quite necessary that in formulating
					questions the questioner should accommodate himself
					to the proficiency or natural capacity of the speaker,
					to those matters in which he is at his best 
 ; not
					forcibly to divert one who is more concerned with the
					ethical side of philosophy, by plying him with questions
					in natural science or mathematics, or to drag the man
					who poses as an authority on natural science into
					passing judgement on the hypothetical propositions 
					of logic or solutions of quibbles like the Liar Problem. 
					For just as one who should go about to split wood
					with a key, or to open his door with an axe, would
					not be thought to offer an indignity to those instruments but to deprive himself of the proper use and
					function of each, so those persons who ask of a speaker
					something for which he is not apt by nature or by
					practice, and do not gather and take what he has
					to offer, not only suffer harm thereby, but also incur
					the name and blame of malice and hostility as well.

A man must also guard against proposing many
					problems or proposing them often himself. For this
					
					 
					
					is, in a way, the mark of a man who is taking occasion
					to show himself off. But to listen good-naturedly
					when another advances them, marks the considerate
					gentleman and the scholar. The only exception is
					in case some matter of his own is troublesome and
					urgent, some emotion requiring repression, or a
					disorder requiring relief. For perhaps it may not
					even be better to conceal ignorance, as Heracleitus puts it, but to set it forth in public, and cure
					it. And if some fit of temper, or attack of superstition, or an intense disagreement with members
					of our own household, or a mad desire born of love,
					 Stirring
						the heart-strings never stirred before, 
 
					brings confusion to our thoughts, we must not run
					away to other kinds of discourse to escape being
					taken to task, but we must listen to the discussion
					of these very matters both at the formal exercises,
					and after the exercises, when we approach the men
					privately and question them further. But save us
					from the contrary course, followed by the majority,
					who are delighted with the philosophers and admire
					them when they are discoursing about other people;
					but if the philosopher leaves the other people alone,
					and addresses himself frankly and freely to them,
					and sets them in mind of matters that much concern
					them, they are annoyed and think him officious.
					For, as a rule, they imagine that they ought to listen
					to the philosophers in the schools as they listen to the
					tragedians in the theatres; but in matters out of
					school they think the philosophers are no better men
					than themselves. Now there is some reason that
					they should feel thus towards the popular lecturers;
					for when these get up from the speaker's chair, and
					
					 
					
					put away their books and lecture notes, it is apparent
					that in the real pursuits of life they are small men
					and rank lower than the average; but towards
					philosophers of the real sort it is not right that they
					have such a feeling, not realizing that seriousness and
					jest in them, nod, or smile, or frown, and, above all,
					what they say to each person apart, may yield a
					return which is profitable for those who have
					acquired the habit of patient attention.

The proprieties in regard to bestowing commendation also require some caution and moderation, for the reason that neither deficiency nor excess
					therein befits the free man. An offensive and tiresome listener is the man who is not to be touched or
					moved by anything that is said, full of festering
					presumption and ingrained self-assertion, as though
					convinced that he could say something better than
					what is being said, who neither moves his brow nor
					utters a single word to bear witness that he is glad
					to listen, but by means of silence and an affected
					gravity and pose, seeks to gain a reputation for
					poise and profundity; as though commendation
					were money, he feels that he is robbing himself of
					every bit that he bestows on another. For there are
					many who take that saying of Pythagoras wrongly
					and out of harmony with his meaning. He declared
					that he had gained this advantage from philosophy,
					to wonder at nothing; but these men think that
					their advantage gained is to commend nothing, to
					show respect for nothing, holding that immunity
					from wonder lies in disdain, and seeking to attain
					to dignity by means of contempt. Now it is true
					that philosophic reasoning, through knowledge and
					acquaintance with the cause in every case, does away
					
					 
					
					with the wonder and amazement that spring from
					blindness and ignorance, but at the same time it
					does not destroy our serenity, moderation, or human
					interest. For to persons who are truly and consistently good it is the highest credit to bestow credit
					upon someone deserving of credit, and the most
					conspicuous honour to honour such a man, since this
					argues a superabundant and generous store of repute;
					whereas those who are niggardly in their commendation of others give the impression of being pinched
					and starving for their own.
					On the other hand, however, the opposite type
					of person, light-minded and flighty, who uses no
					judgement, but hangs intent on every word and
					syllable with an ejaculation ready on his lips, is
					frequently no satisfaction to the disputants themselves, and is always a painful affliction for the
					audience, startling them as he does and exciting
					them to join him contrary to their judgement, as
					though they for shame could not help being dragged
					into the applause. He gets no benefit from the
					lecture because for him it has been made full of
					confusion and fluttering excitement by his continual
					applaudings, and he departs with the name of being
					one of three things: a dissembler, a flatterer, or a
					boor in all that relates to discourse.
					Now a man sitting as a judge in court is bound to
					listen without regard either to enmity or favour, but
					in sober judgement with regard to justice; but at
					scholarly lectures no law and no oath prohibits us
					from receiving the lecturer with goodwill. Indeed,
					the ancients gave Hermes a place beside the Graces
					from a feeling that discourse demands, above all,
					graciousness and friendliness. For it is not possible
					
					 
					
					for a speaker to be a failure so abject and complete
					that he does not afford something meriting commendation, an original thought, a reminiscence
					from others, the very subject and purpose of his
					discourse, or at least the style and arrangement of
					his remarks, 
					 Just as amid urchin's foot and the rough
						rest-harrow Flowering snowdrops grow, delicate in their bloom. 
 
					For when some have declaimed a panegyric upon
					vomiting or fever, nay I vow, even upon a kitchenpot, not without a certain amount of plausibility,
					how could it be that a discourse delivered by a
					man who in some sort bears the repute and name
					of philosopher, should not offer, at some point, to
					benevolent and humane hearers some respite and
					opportunity for commendation ? We know, at any
					rate, that all persons in the bloom of youth do somehow or other, as Plato says, act as a stimulus upon
					the man inclined to love; the fair ones he names
					 children of the gods, the dark manly, while
					the hook-nosed he endearingly terms kingly, the
					snub-nosed fetching, the sallow honey-hued, 
					and so welcomes and likes them all; for love, like ivy,
					is clever in attaching itself to any support. Much
					more, then, will the scholar and diligent hearer
					always be ready to discover some cause for which
					he may openly bestow on every speaker some commendation not inappropriate. So Plato, although
					he cannot commend Lysias's speech for invention,
					and although he condemns its arrangement as disorderly, nevertheless commends the style, and that
					 each word was clearly and roundly turned. One
					
					
					 
					
					might find fault with Archilochus for his subject
					matter, Parmenides for his versification, Phocylides
					as commonplace, Euripides for his loquacity, and
					Sophocles for his unevenness; and it is equally true of
					the orators that one of them has no power to portray
					character, another is slow to rouse emotion, another
					is lacking in grace; yet it is a fact that each one of
					them is commended for the special faculty with which
					Nature has taught him to move us and draw us on.
					It follows, then, that there is ample and abundant
					opportunity for hearers to show friendliness toward
					those who are speaking. For some it is quite enough,
					even if we do not attest this by the voice, that we
					vouchsafe to them a gentleness of glance, a serenity
					of countenance, and a disposition kindly and free
					from annoyance.
					Finally, the following matters, even with speakers
					who make a complete failure, are, as it were, general
					and common requirements at every lecture: to sit
					upright without any lounging or sprawling, to look
					directly at the speaker, to maintain a pose of active
					attention, and a sedateness of countenance free from
					any expression, not merely of arrogance or displeasure, but even of other thoughts and preoccupations. Now in every piece of work, beauty is achieved
					through the congruence of numerous factors, so to
					speak, brought into union under the rule of a certain
					due proportion and harmony, whereas ugliness is
					ready to spring into being if only a single chance
					element be omitted or added out of place. And so
					in the particular case of a lecture, not only frowning, a sour face, a roving glance, twisting the body
					about, and crossing the legs, are unbecoming, but
					even nodding, whispering to another, smiling, sleepy
					
					 
					
					yawns, bowing down the head, and all like actions,
					are culpable and need to be carefully avoided.

There are others who think that the speaker
					has a function to perform, and the hearer none.
					They think it only right that the speaker shall come
					with his discourse carefully thought out and prepared,
					while they, without consideration or thought of their
					obligations, rush in and take their seats exactly as
					though they had come to dinner, to have a good
					time while others toil. And yet even a well-bred
					guest at dinner has a function to perform, much more
					a hearer; for he is a participant in the discourse and
					a fellow-worker with the speaker, and he ought not
					rigorously to examine the speaker's little slips, applying his criticism to every word and action, while
					he himself, without being subject to any criticism,
					acts unhandsomely and commits many gross improprieties in the matter of listening. On the contrary,
					just as in playing ball it is necessary for the catcher
					to adapt his movements to those of the thrower and
					to be actively in accord with him, so with discourses,
					there is a certain accord between the speaker and
					the hearer, if each is heedful of his obligation.

Then also the terms used in commendations
					must not be indiscriminate. For Epicurus himself
					is displeasing when he says of his friends' letters
					that they give rise to hullabaloos. And those
					persons who nowadays introduce into our lecturerooms outlandish expressions, who are wont to
					exclaim over a lecture Divine, and Inspired, 
					and Unapproachable, as though it were no longer
					enough to say Hear, Hear! and Good! and
					 Right! as Plato and Socrates and Hypereides
					and their friends used to do to show their commendation,
					
					 
					
					behave in a most unseemly manner, and
					traduce the speakers, as though these desired such
					high-flown and excessive commendations. Exceedingly displeasing also are those who use an oath in
					testifying to their approval of the speakers as though
					in a law court. No less so are those who fail to
					respect the quality of persons, and cry aloud to a
					philosopher Smart! or to an aged man Clever! 
					or Flowery! , thus transferring to the philosophers
					the expressions of those who make a sport and an
					opportunity to show off out of their scholastic
					exercises, and applying meretricious commendation
					to sober discourse, as though they should put on an
					athlete's head a crown of lilies or roses instead of
					laurel or wild olive! Once when Euripides the poet
					was going over for the members of his chorus a
					lyric passage set to music one of them burst out
					laughing; whereat Euripides remarked, If you
						were not so stupid and ignorant, you would not
						have laughed while I was singing in most solemn
						measure. 
 And so, as I think, one who is a
					philosopher and statesman might repress the
					exuberance of a graceless hearer by saying, You
						seem to me to be an ill-bred fool; else, while I am
						giving instruction or admonition, or discoursing upon
						the gods or the State or its government, you would
						not be whistling and dancing a jig to my words. 
					Just consider what it really means, if, when a
					philosopher is speaking, the people outside, by reason
					of the clamour and shouting of those within, are
					unable to make out whether the applause is for
					some flute-player, or harper, or dancer.

Moreover, admonitions and rebukes must be
					
					
					 
					
					listened to neither with stolid indifference nor with
					unseemly emotion. For those who can submit to
					being reproved by philosophers so light-heartedly and
					heedlessly as to laugh when being taken to task and
					to commend those who take them to task, as parasites
					do when abused by those at whose expense they live,
					are utterly froward and bold, and they give no good
					or genuine proof of manliness by their shameless
					behaviour. As for a pleasant scoff, wittily delivered and
					in pure fun, if a man know how to take it cheerfully
					and without offence, his conduct argues no ignoble
					or uncultured mind, but one altogether generous
					and Spartan. On the other hand, to hear a reprehension or admonition to reform character, delivered
					in words that penetrate like a biting drug, and not
					to be humbled at hearing it, not to run into a sweating
					and dizziness, not to burn with shame in the soul, but,
					on the contrary to listen unmoved, grinning, dissembling in the face of it all, is a notable sign of an
					illiberal nature in the young, dead to all modesty
					because of an habitual and continued acquaintance
					with wrongdoing, with a soul like hard and calloused
					flesh, upon which no lash can leave a weal.
					Such is the behaviour of those who belong to this
					class. But young men of the opposite temperament,
					if they ever hear a single word directed against
					themselves, run away without looking back, and try
					to desert philosophy; and, although the sense of
					modesty which Nature has bestowed upon them is an
					admirable beginning for their salvation, they lose
					it through effeminacy and weakness, since they
					display no firmness under reproof, nor do they accept
					corrections with the proper spirit, but they turn away
					their ears toward the agreeable and gentle converse
					
					 
					
					of sundry flatterers or voluble talkers, who enchant
					them with useless and unprofitable but nevertheless
					pleasant utterances. Just as one who runs away
					from the physician after an operation, and will not
					submit to be bandaged, sustains all the pain of the
					treatment, but waits not for its benefits: so when
					the word has cut and wounded a man's foolishness,
					if he give it no chance to heal and quiet the wound,
					he comes away from philosophy with a smart and
					pain but with no benefit. For not only the wound
					of Telephus, as Euripides says,
					 Is soothed by fine-rasped
						filings from the spear, 
					but the smart from philosophy which sinks deep in
					young men of good parts is healed by the very words
					which inflicted the hurt. For this reason he who is
					taken to task must feel and suffer some smart, yet
					he should not be crushed or dispirited, but, as though
					at a solemn rite of novitiate which consecrates him
					to philosophy, he should submit to the initial purifications and commotions, in the expectation that
					something delectable and splendid will follow upon
					his present distress and perturbation. Indeed, even
					if the reproof seems to be given unjustly, it is an
					admirable thing to endure it with continued patience
					while the man is speaking; and when he has come
					to the end, to go to him with an explanation, and beg
					him to reserve for some real misconduct the frankness
					and earnestness that he has employed in the present
					instance.

Moreover, just as in learning to read and
					write, or in taking up music or physical training, the
					first lessons are attended with much confusion, hard
					work, and uncertainty, but later, as the learner
					makes progress, by slow degrees, just as in his
					
					 
					
					relations with human beings, a full familiarity is
					engendered and knowledge which renders everything attractive, feasible, and easy, both to say and
					to do, so also is it with philosophy, which undoubtedly
					has something knotty and unfamiliar in its terms and
					subject matter at the outset; yet one ought not to
					take fright at its beginnings, and to abandon it in
					timorous and craven fashion; rather should he
					examine each point, and persist and stick to the task
					of getting on, while awaiting that familiarity which
					makes every noble thing a pleasure. For come it
					will without long delay, bringing with it abundant
					light for the subject of study; it will inspire also a
					passionate love for virtue; and anyone who could
					endure to pass the rest of his life without this passion,
					because he has exiled himself from philosophy for
					want of true manliness, brands himself either as a
					very presumptuous man or else a coward.
					It is quite possible that the subject of philosophy
					contains some matter which is difficult for young
					and inexperienced students to apprehend at the
					outset. But, at the same time, they must hold
					themselves responsible for most of the uncertainty
					and misunderstanding in which they find themselves
					involved, since quite opposite characters come to fall
					into the same error. Some, because of a feeling of
					shame and a desire to spare the speaker, hesitate to
					ask questions and to get the argument firmly fixed
					in their minds, nodding their heads in assent as
					though they comprehended it; others, led by an
					unseasonable ambition and inane rivalry with their
					fellow-students, to show off their acuteness and their
					ability to learn easily, avow that they have the
					meaning before they have grasped it, and so do not
					
					 
					
					
					grasp it at all. Then the result is that those modest
					and silent persons, after leaving the lecture, distress
					themselves over their difficulties, and finally, driven
					by necessity, with even greater shame this time,
					they trouble the lecturers with questions which they
					should have asked before, and try to catch up; but
					with the ambitious and self-confident young men,
					the result is that they are all the time trying to
					cover up and conceal the ignorance that abides with
					them.

Let us therefore put from us all such foolishness
					and pretension, and, as we go onward to the task of
					learning, let us take pains thoroughly to comprehend
					all profitable discourses; let us submit with patience
					to the laughter of those reputed to be clever, as
					did Cleanthes and Xenocrates, who, although they
					seemed to be slower than their schoolmates, yet did
					not try to escape learning or give it up in despair,
					but were the first to make jokes at themselves by
					comparing themselves to narrow-necked bottles and
					bronze tablets, as much as to say that they found
					great difficulty in taking in what was said, yet they
					kept it safely and securely. For not only is one
					bound, as Phocylides says,
					 Many a time to be cheated of hope when he seeks
						to be noble, 
 
					but he is bound also many a time to be laughed at
					and to be in disrepute, and to put up with joking and
					buffoonery as he struggles with might and main
					against his ignorance and overthrows it.
					On the other hand, however, we certainly must
					not neglect the mistake that leads to the opposite
					extreme, which some persons are led to commit by
					laziness, thus making themselves unpleasant and
					
					 
					
					irksome. For when they are by themselves they
					are not willing to give themselves any trouble, but
					they give trouble to the speaker by repeatedly
					asking questions about the same things, like unfledged nestlings always agape toward the mouth of
					another, and desirous of receiving everything ready
					prepared and predigested. There is another class,
					who, eager to be thought astute and attentive out
					of due place, wear out the speakers with loquacity
					and officiousness, by continually propounding some
					extraneous and unessential difficulty and asking for
					demonstrations of matters that need no demonstration, and so, as Sophocles puts it,
					 Much time it takes to go a
						little way, 
					not only for themselves but for the rest of the
					company too. For holding back the speaker on
					every possible occasion by their inane and superfluous
					questions, as in a company of persons travelling
					together, they impede the regular course of the
					lecture, which has to put up with halts and delays.
					Now such persons are, according to Hieronymus, like
					cowardly and persistent puppies which, at home,
					bite at the skins of wild animals, and tear off what
					bits they can, but never touch the animals themselves. But as for those lazy persons whom we have
					mentioned, let us urge them that, when their
					intelligence has comprehended the main points, they
					put the rest together by their own efforts, and use
					their memory as a guide in thinking for themselves,
					and, taking the discourse of another as a germ and
					seed, develop and expand it. For the mind does
					not require filling like a bottle, but rather, like wood,
					it only requires kindling to create in it an impulse
					to think independently and an ardent desire for the
					
					 
					
					truth. Imagine, then, that a man should need to
					get fire from a neighbour, and, upon finding a big
					bright fire there, should stay there continually
					warming himself; just so it is if a man comes to
					another to share the benefit of a discourse, and does
					not think it necessary to kindle from it some illumination for himself and some thinking of his own, but,
					delighting in the discourse, sits enchanted; he gets,
					as it were, a bright and ruddy glow in the form of
					opinion imparted to him by what is said, but the
					mouldiness and darkness of his inner mind he has
					not dissipated nor banished by the warm glow of
					philosophy.
					Finally, if there be need of any other instruction
					in regard to listening to a lecture, it is that it is
					necessary to keep in mind what has here been said,
					and to cultivate independent thinking along with our
					learning, so that we may acquire a habit of mind
					that is not sophistic or bent on acquiring mere
					information, but one that is deeply ingrained and
					philosophic, as we may do if we believe that right
					listening is the beginning of right living.