LYCINUS 
Lexiphanes, the glass of fashion, with a book?
 
 LEXIPHANES 
Yes, Lycinus; ’tis one of my own productions of
this very season, quite recent.
 
 LYCINUS 
Why, are you now writing us something indecent ? 
 LEXIPHANES 
No, forsooth, and I did not say indecent. Come,
it is full time you learned to apply that word of
mine to things newly indited. It would seem that
your ears are stopped with wax.
 
 LYCINUS 
Excuse me, my friend. Between indecent and
recent there is a great dealin common. But tell me,
what is the theme of your work?
 
 LEXIPHANES 
I am counter-banqueting the son of Aristo in it.




 

 LYCINUS 
There are many “Aristos,” but to judge from
your “banquet’ I suppose you mean Plato.
 
 LEXIPHANES 
You rede me right, but what I said would have
been caviare to the general.
 
 LYCINUS 
Well then, you must read me a few passages from
the book, so that I shan’t miss the feast entirely,
I dare say you will properly “wine us with nectar”
out of it. 
 LEXIPHANES 
Suppress Master Irony, then, and make your ears
permeable before you give them to me. Avaunt
with the obturations of Dame Cypselis! 
 LYCINUS 
Say your say confidently, for no Cypselus nor any
Periander has taken up lodgings in my ears.
 
 LEXIPHANES 
Consider withal how I carry myself in the book
—whether it has a good entrance, a rich display of
good discourse and composure, and good store of
egregious words.





 

 LYCINUS 
It is sure to have that, being yours. But do begin
now.

LEXIPHANES 
(reads)
“Then we shall dine,” quoth Callicles, “and then,
at eventide, fetch a turn in the Lyceum; but now
it is high season to endue ourselves with sunburn
and tepify ourselves in the calid ambient, and after
laving, to break bread. We must away forthwith.
My lad, convoy me my strigil, scrip, diapers, and
purgaments to the bath-house, and fetch the wherewithal. ’Tis on the floor, mark you, alongside the
coffer, a brace of obols. And you, Lexiphanes,
whatever shall you do? Shall you come, or tarry
yet a while hereabouts?”
“I too,” said I, “am yearning to ablute these ages
past, for I am ill-conditioned, susceptible behind from
riding pillion on a mule. The muleteer kept me
going, though he himself was jigging it hot-foot. 
But even in the country I was not unassiduous, for
I found the yokels caroling the harvest-home;
some of them, too, were preparing a grave for my
father. After I had assisted them in the engraving
and for a brief space shared the handiwork of the
dikers, I dispersed them on account of the cold and
because they were getting burned (in severe cold,
you know, burning ensues). For myself, I got about
the simples, found prickmadam growing among
them, exhumed sundry radishes, garnered chervils
and potherbs, and bought groats. But the meads
were not yet redolent enough for travelling by shank’s



 

mare; so I mounted the pillion and had my rump
excoriated. Now I walk excruciatingly, I perspire
amain, my flesh is very weak, and I want to play
about in the water no end. I delight in the
prospect of dissolution after toil.

Therefore I shall
betake myself incontinently to my urchin, who
belike attends me at the pease-porridge woman’s or
the frippery, although he was forewarned to turn
up at the comfit-shop. 

 
“In the nick of time, however, here he is himself,
and I see he has chaffered beestings-pudden, ashcake, chibbals, hakot, nape of beef—mark you !—
dewlap, manyplies, and lamb’s fries. Good, Atticion! You have made most of my journey invious.”
“For my part,” quoth he, “I have got squinny,
master, keeping an eye out for you. Where were you
dining yesterday? With Onomacritus, prithee?”
“Nay, gadzooks,” quoth I: “I made off to the
countryside, helter-skelter. You know how I adore
rusticating. The rest of you no doubt supposed
that I was playing toss-pot. But go you in and
relish all of this; also cleanse the kneading-trough,
that you may work us up some lettuce-loaf.

I 
myself shall be off and bestow upon myself an
inunction sans immersion.” 

 
“We,” quoth Philinos, “I and Onomarchus and
Hellanicus here, shall have after you, for the style
shadows the middle of the bowl, and it is to be






 

feared that we may lave in the leavings of the
bargashes, along with the scum, in a jostle.”” Then
said Hellanicus: “I look askew, for my dollies are
obfuscate, I nictitate full oft, and I am lachrymose ;
mine eyes want drugging, I require some scion of
Aesculapius, sage in ophthalmotherapy, who will
compound and decant a specific for me, and so
effect that my ruddy optics may be decoloured
and no longer be rheumatic or have a humorous
cast.”

Discoursing in this wise, all those of us present
were gone. When we came to the gymnasium, we
despoiled ourselves. One exercised himself at
wrestling with shoulder-holds, another with neckholds, standing; one sleeked himself with unguent
and essayed eluding grasps; one countered the
wind-bag, one, grasping leaden sows, whipped his
arms about. Then, once we were dressed down 
and had backed each other, and used the gymnasium
for our sport, Philinus and I imbathed ourselves in
the hot pool and emerged, while the rest, beducking
their sconces in the cold plunge, swam about
subaquaneous in wondrous guise.
 

 
Upon reversion, we imbusied ourselves with this,
that or t’other. I myself indued my boots, dressed
my scalp with a tined card, for I had got shorn
with the “bowl” cut, not the “bush”; for not long




 

ago my chaps and crown had been displumed. 
Someone else was gobbling lupines, another was
evomiting his jejunity, another was. diminishing
radishes and sopping up a mess of fishy pottage,
another was eating flummery, and yet another engorging barley brose.

When the time was ripe, we dined on our elbows.
Both faldstools and truckles were at hand. The
dinner was picked up; many different viands had
been made ready, pig’s trotters, spareribs, tripe, the
caul of a sow that had littered, panned pluck, spoonmeat of cheese and honey, shallot-pickle and other
such condiments, crumpets, stuffed fig-leaves, sweets.
Of submarine victuals, too, there were many sorts of
selacian, all the ostraceans, cuts of Pontic tunny in
hanapers, Copaic lassies, vernacular fowl, muted
chanticleers, and an odd fish—the parasite. Yes,
and we had a whole sheep barbecued, and the
hind-quarter of an edentulous ox. Besides, there
was bread from Siphae, not bad, and novilunar buns,
too late for the fair, as well as vegetables, both
underground and over grown. And there was wine,
not vetust, but out of a leathern bottle, dry by
now but still crude.

Drinking-cups of all kinds stood on the dresser,





 

your brow-hider, your Mentor-made dipper with a
convenient tail-piece, your gurgler, your longnecker, many “earth-borns” like what Thericles 
used to bake, vessels both ventricose and patulous,
some from Phocaeawards, other some from Cnidos
way, all airy trifles, hymen-thin. There were also
boats, chalices, and lettered mugs, so that the
cupboard was full.

The calefactor, however, slopped over on our
heads and delivered us a consignment of coals. But
we drank bottoms up and soon were well fortified.
Then we endued ourselves with baccharis, and
someone trundled in the girl that treads the mazy
and juggles balls; after which, one of us, scrambling
up to the coekloft, went looking for something to
top off with, whilst another fell to thrumming and
another laughingly wriggled his hips.

Meantime, after lavation, came rollicking in to
us, self-invited, Megalonymus the pettifogger,
Chaereas the goldworker, he with the back of many
colours, and Eudemus the broken-ear.” I asked









 

them what possessed them to come late. Quoth
Chaereas: “I was forging trumpery for my daughter,
balls and chains, and that is why I have come in
on top of your dinner.” “For my part,” quoth
Megalonymus, “I was about other matters. The
day was incapable of justice, as ye wit, and incompetent for pleading; wherefore, as there was a truce
of the tongue, I was unable either to palaver or, as
is my diurnal habit, to solicit. , Learning that the
magistrate was being grilled in public, I took an
unvalued cloak, of sheer tissue, and priceless boots,
and emitted myself.

Forthwith I hit upon the Torch-bearer and the
Hierophant, with the other participants in unutterable rites, haling Deinias neck and crop to
the office, bringing the charge that he had named
them, albeit he knew right well that from the time
when they were hallowed they were nameless
and thenceforth ineffable, as being now all Hieronymuses.” 
 “I do not know,” said I, “the Deinias that you
mention, but the name intrigues me.” “A clove-









 

engulfing haunter of gaming-houses,” quoth he;
“one of those bezonians, those joculators, a curlilocks, wearing lace boots or pantoffles, with manches
to his shirt.” “Well,’ said I, ‘did he in some
wise pay the piper; or did he take himself off after
setting his heel upon them?” “Verily,” said he,
“that fellow, the whilom swaggerer, is now ensconced; for, notwithstanding his reluctation, the
magistrate decked him out with wristlets and a
necklace and lodged him in the bilboes and the stocks.
Wherefore, being impounded, the sorry wretch
fusted for fear, and trumped, and was fain to give
weregelt.”

“I,” quoth Eudemus, “was summoned as it grew
crepuscular by Damasias the quondam athlete and
champion, now out of the lists for eld—the brazen
image, you know, in the square. He was hard at it
a-plucking and a-singeing, for he intended to marry
off his daughter to-day and was busking her. Then
a Termerian misadventure befell that cut short the
gala day. Distraught over I know not what, or more
likely overtaken by divine detestation, his son Dion
hung himself, and, depend upon it, he would have
been undone if I had not been there to slip the
noose and relieve him of his coil. Squatting on my





 

hunkers beside him for a long time, I jobbed him,
titillating and sounding him lest perchance his
windpipe still hang together. But what helped
most was that I confined his extremes with both
hands and applied pressure.”

“Prithee,” quoth I, “dost mean that notable
Dion, the slack-pursed libertine, the toothpickchewing aesthete, who strouts and gropes if ever he
sees anyone that is well hung? He is a scapegrace
and arutter.” “Well,” said Eudemus, “Damasias
in amaze invoked the goddess—they have an Artemis
in the middle of the hall, a Scopadean masterpiece
—and he and his wife, who is now elderly and quite
lyart-polled, flung themselves upon her and besought
her to pity them. She at once inclined her head,
and he was well; so that now they have a Theodore 
or rather, manifestly an Artemidore in the young
man. So they have made offerings of all sorts
to her, including bows and arrows, since she takes
pleasure in these; for Artemis is a good bowyer,
she is a Far-darter, a very Telemachus.”

“Let us be drinking, then,” quoth Megalonymus,
“for I am come bringing you this senile flagon,
green cheese, windfallen olives—I keep them under
wormscriven seals —and other olives, soused, and







 

these earthen cups of cockle-shell, stanchly bottomed,
for us to drink out of, and a cake of chitterlings
braided like a topknot. My lad, pour in more of
the water for me, that I may not begin to have a
head, and then call your keeper to come for you.
You know that I have my pains and keep my head
invested.

And now that we have drunk, we shall
gossip according to our wont, for in good sooth it is
not inopportune to prate when we are in our cups.”
“T approve this,” said I, “and why not, for we are
the sheer quintessence of Atticism.” ‘ Very true,”
quoth Callicles, “for quizzing each other incessantly
is a whet to loquacity.” “As to me,” said Eudemus,
“since it is brumal I had liefer fence myself with
stiffer drink. I am starved with cold, and when I
am warmed I would fain hear these handiwise 
folk, the flute-player and the harper.”

“What was that you said, Eudemus?” said I.
“Do you enjoin alogy upon us as if we were inarticulate and elinguid? My tongue is already pregnant
with utterance, and in sooth I set sail in the intent
to archaise with you and wash you up with my
tongue, one and all. But you have treated me as if
a three-masted vessel were sailing before the wind
with full kites, running easy and spooming over the
billows, and then someone, letting go double-tongued
refrainers, pigs of iron, and bowers, were to curb
the impetuosity of her course, begrudging her the
fair wind.”





 
 

 
“Well, then,” quoth he, “you, if you like, may
sail and swim and course over the main, but I from
off the land, with a drink at my elbow, like Homer’s
Zeus, shall look upon you either from a bald cop or
the pitch of heaven as you drive and the wind gives
your vessel a saucy fairing from astern.”

LYCINUS 
Enough, Lexiphanes, both of the drinking-party
and of the reading. I am already half-seas-over and
squeamish, and if I do not very soon jettison all this
gallimaufry of yours, depend upon it, I expect to
go raving crazy with the roaring in my ears from
the words with which you have showered me. At
first I was inclined to laugh at it all, but when it
turned out to be such a quantity and all of a sort, I
pitied you for your hard luck, seeing that you had
fallen into a labyrinthine maze from which there was
no escaping and were afflicted with the most serious
of all illnesses—I mean, were as mad as a hatter.

I have been quietly wondering from what source
you have culled so much pestilential stuff, and how
long it took you, and where you locked up and kept
such a swarm of outlandish distorted expressions,
of which you made some yourself and resurrected
others from the graves in which they lay buried
somewhere. As the verse puts it,
 Plague take you, that you garner mortal woes, 
such a mess of filthy bilge water did you get together
and fling over me, when I had done you no harm at
all. Youseem to me not only to be destitute of friends
and relatives and well-wishers but never to have
fallen in with an independent man practising frank-

 

ness, who by telling you the truth might have relieved
you, dropsical as you are and in danger of bursting
with the disease, although to yourself you appear
to be in good point and you consider your calami
the pink of condition. You are praised by the fools,
to be sure, who do not know what ails you; but the
intelligent fittingly pity you.

But what luck! here I see Sopolis the physician
drawing near. Come now, suppose we put you in his
hands, have a consultation with him about your
complaint, and find some cure for you. The man
is clever, and often before now, taking charge of
people like yourself, half crazed and full of drivel,
he has relieved them with his doses of medicine.
—Good-day to you, Sopolis. Do take charge of
Lexiphanes here, who is my friend, as you know,
and at present has on him a nonsensical, outlandish
distemper affecting his speech which is likely to be
the death of him outright. Do save him in one way
or another.

LEXIPHANES 
Not me, Sopolis, but this man Lycinus, who is
patently maggoty and thinks that well-furnished
heads want wits, and imposes silence and a truce of
the tongue upon us in the style of the son of Mnesarchus, the Samian. _ But I protest, by bashless
Athena and by mighty Heracles, slayer of ferines,
I shan’t bother even a flock or a doit about him! In
fact I abominate meeting him at all, and I am fit to
snort when I hear him pass such censure. Any-


 

how, I am this moment going off to my comrade
Cleinias’s because I am informed that for some time
now his wife is irregular and out of sorts by reason
of wanting issue, so that he no longer even knows
her ; she is unapproachable and uncultivated.

SOPOLIS 
What ails him, Lycinus?
 
 LYCINUS 
Just that, Sopolis! Can’t you hear how he talks?
Abandoning us, who converse with him now, he talks
to us from a thousand years ago, distorting his
language, making these preposterous combinations,
and taking himself very seriously in the matter, as
if it were a great thing for him to use an alien
idiom and debase the established currency of speech.
 
 SOPOLIS 
By Zeus, it is no trivial disorder you tell of, Lycinus.
The man must be helped by all means. As good
luck would have it, I came away with this medicine,
made up for an insane person, so that by taking it he
might throw off his bile. Come, you be the first to
take it, Lexiphanes, that we may have you cured
and cleansed, once you have rid yourself of such
impossible language. Do obey me and take it, and
you will feel better.
 
 LEXIPHANES 
I don’t know what you and Lycinus mean to do
to me, Sopolis, plying me with this drench. Indeed,
I fear your draught may chill my vocabulary.


 

 LYCINUS 
Drink without delay, that at last you may be
human in thought and speech.
 
 LEXIPHANES 
There, I obey and drink. Oh me, what is this?
The bombilation is vast! I would seem to have
swallowed a familiar spirit.

SOPOLIS 
Begin now to lighten yourself. Aha! First, this
“prithee,” then after it “eftsoons” has come up;
then on their heels his “quoth he” and “in some
wise,’ and “fair sir,” and “in sooth,’ and _ his
incessant “sundry.” Make an effort, however; put
your fingers down your throat. You have not yet
given up “instanter” or “pandiculation” or “divagation” or “spoliation.” Many things still lurk in
hiding and your inwards are full of them. _ It would
be better if some should take the opposite course,
Anyhow, “vilipendency” will make a great racket
when it comes tumbling out on the wings of the
wind. 

 
Well, this man is now purged, unless something
has remained behind in his lower intestines. It is
for you next, Lycinus, to take him on, mending his
education and teaching him what to say.

LYCINUS 
That I will, Sopolis, since you have cleared the
way for me, and the advice which will follow is to
your address, Lexiphanes. If you really desire to
be genuinely praised for style and to have a great
name among the public, avoid and shun all this sort
of thing. After beginning with the best poets and
reading them under tutors, pass to the orators, and
when you have become familiar with their diction,
go over in due time to Thucydides and Plato—but
only after you have first disciplined yourself
thoroughly in attractive comedy and sober tragedy.
When you have garnered all that is fairest from these
sources, you will be a personality in letters. Before,
you had unconsciously become like the images shaped
for the market by the modellers of figurines, coloured
with red and blue on the surface, but clay on the
inside, and very fragile.

If you do this, abiding for a time the reproach of
illiteracy and feeling no shame to mend your knowledge, you will address the public confidently and
will not be laughed at as you are now, or talked
about in an uncomplimentary manner by our best
people, who dub you “the Greek” and “the
Athenian” when you do not deserve to be numbered
even among the most intelligible of barbarians.
Before all else, however, please remember not to
imitate the most worthless productions of the
Sophists who lived only a little before our own
time, or to go nibbling at that stuff as you do now
—tread that sort of thing underfoot and copy the
ancient models only. And do not let yourself be
enticed by the wind-flowers of speech, but follow
the custom of the athletes and habituate yourself

 

to solid nourishment. Above all, sacrifice to the
Graces and to Clearness; you are very remote from
them at present!

As for vanity, boastfulness and
malice, blustering and bawling, away with them,
and with girding at the works of all others and
thinking that you yourself will be first if you carp
at the achievements of everyone else. 

 
Yes, and there is also this fault which you have,
not a slight one, but rather the greatest possible :
you do not prepare your thoughts in advance of
your words and subsequently dress them out in the
parts of speech, but if you find anywhere an outlandish expression or make one up yourself and
think it pretty, you endeavour to fit the thought to
it and think yourself damaged if you cannot stuff it
in somewhere, even if it is not essential to what you
are saying. For example, the other day, without
even knowing what “‘scintilla” meant, you tossed it
off when it had no relation at all to the subject,
and the vulgar to a man were dazed when its
unfamiliarity struck their ears, but the well-informed
laughed, not only at you but at your admirers.

What is most ridiculous of all is that although you
want to be more than Attic and have meticulously
shaped your diction after the most antiquated
pattern, some (or rather, most) of the expressions
which you intermingle with what you say are
such that even a boy just beginning school would
not fail to know them. For instance, you can’t
think how I prayed for the earth to swallow me as I
listened to the exhibition you made of yourself
when you thought that “shift’? meant a man’s
garment also, and used “slatterns” of male servants
when who does not know that a shift is a female

 

garment and that only women are called slatterns?
And there were other things far more obvious than
these, like “‘flopped” and “meeting up” and
“setting,” which are not even naturalised in the
Attic tongue. We do not praise even poets who
compose poems that are all full of rare words, but
your compositions, if I might compare prose to verse,
would be like the “Altar” of Dosiadas, the
“Alexandra” of Lycophron, and whatever else
is still more infelicitous in diction than those works. 
If you imitate the men of whom I have spoken
and if you repair your education, you will have
planned the best possible course for yourself, but if
you unwittingly slip back into your preciosity, I at
least have done my part in advising you and you
may blame yourself, if indeed you are conscious of
deterioration.