[In the year that Aristarchus of Phalerum was archon,
on the seventh day of the month Pyanepsion, Sigma
brought suit against Tau before the seven Vowels for
assault and robbery, alleging that he had stolen all the
words that are pronounced mith double tau.]

Vowels of the jury, as long as the wrongs that I
underwent at the hands of this fellow Tau through
his misusing my property and establishing himself
where he had no business were but slight, I did not
take the injury to heart, and I ignored some of the
things that I heard because of the equable temper
which, as you know, I maintain toward you and the
other letters. But now that he has come to such a
pitch of self-seeking and lawlessness that, not content
with what I have repeatedly let pass in silence, he is
trying to wrest still more from me, I am compelled
to call him to account before you, who know both
sides. Besides all this, I am more than a little afraid
of my own ejection; for by making greater and


 

greater additions to what he has already done he will
altogether eject me from my own estate, so that if I
keep quiet I shall scarcely count at all as a letter,
and shall be no better than a hiss.

It is fitting, then, that you who are now on the
jury and all the other letters, too, should be on your
guard against his pernicious activity, for if anyone
who wants to may work his way out of his own place
into someone else’s, and if you Vowels, without whom
nothing can be written that means anything, are
going to permit this, I do not see how society is
to keep the orthodox distinctions of rank which
were fixed for it in the beginning. But I do not
think you will ever reach such a pitch of negligence
and carelessness as to permit anything unjust, and
even if you do shirk your duty I cannot overlook my
wrongs. If only the others had been thwarted in
their audacity long ago, when they first began to be
law-breakers!

In that case, Lambda would not be at
war with Rho, disputing the possession of pumice-stone (κίσηλις—κίσηρις) and headaches (κεφαλαλγάα—κεφαλαργία), nor would Gamma be quarreiling with
Kappa and again and again almost coming to blows
with him at the fuller’s (γναφεῖον—κναφεῖον) over
pillows (γνάφαλλα—κνάφαλλα), and he would have
been prevented from fighting with Lambda, too,
openly stealing from him with some difficulty (μόλις—μόγις) and slyly filching without any doubt (μάλιστα—
μάγιστα ); and the rest would also have refrained
from beginning illegal confusion. Surely it is best
for each of us to stay in the place which belongs to



 

him: to go wher

one has no right is the act of a
law-breaker.

The man who first framed these laws
for us, be he the islander Cadmus or Nauplius’ son
Palamedes(and some attribute this provision to Simonides), did not determine which of us should be first
and which second solely by putting us in the order
in which our places are now fixed, but they also
decided the qualities and powers that each of us has.
To you, jurors, they gave the greatest honour, because
you can be sounded by yourselves; to the Semivowels
they gave the next highest, because they need
something put with them before they can be heard ;
and they prescribed that the last place of all should
belong to nine letters which have no sound at all by
themselves.
 The Vowels should enforce these laws.

But this Tau here (I cannot call him by a worse
name than his own), who, as Heaven is my witness,
could not have made himself heard unless two of
your number, Alpha and Upsilon, stout fellows and
good to look on, had come to his aid—this Tau, I
say, has had the audacity to injure me beyond
all precedent in acts of violence, not only ousting me from my hereditary nouns and verbs, but
banishing me likewise from conjunctions and prepositions all at once, so that I cannot stand his
monstrous greed any longer. Where and how he
began it, you shall now hear.

Once I made a visit to Cybelus, which is rather an
agreeable little village, settled, the story has it, by .
Athenians. I took with me sturdy Rho, the best of ~
neighbours, and stopped at the house of a comic poet
called Lysimachus, evidently a Boeotian by descent,
though he would have it that he came from the
heart of Attica.
 It was at that foreigner’s that
I detected the encroachments of this fellow Tau. As
long as it was but little that he attempted, venturing
to mispronounce four (τέσσαρα—τέτταρα) and forty
(τεσσαράκοντα—τετταράκοντα), and also to lay hands on
to-day (σήμερον—τήμερον), and the like and say they
were his own, thus depriving me of my kith and kin
among the letters, I thought it was just his way and
could put up with what I heard, and was not much
annoyed over my losses.

But when he went on and
ventured to mispronounce tin (κασσίτερον—καττίτερον)
and shoe-leather (κάσσυμα—κάττυμα), and tar (πίσσα—πίττα), and then, losing all sense of shame, to miscall
queens (βασίλισσα—βασίλιττα), I am uncommonly
annoyed and hot about all this, for I am afraid that
in course of time someone may miscall a spade ! 
Pardon me, in the name of Heaven, for my righteous
anger, discouraged as I am and bereft of partisans.
I am not risking a trifling, every-day stake, for he is
robbing me of acquaintances and companions among
the letters. He snatched a blackbird, a talkative




 

creature, right out of my bosom, almost, and renamed it (κίσσα—κίττα) ; he took away my pheasant
(¢décca—ddrra) along with my ducks (νήσσαι—νήτται)
and my daws (κόσσυφοι—κόττυφοι), although Aristarchus forbade him; he robbed me of not a few
bees (μέλισσα—μέλιττα), and he went to Attica and
illegally plucked Hymessus (Ὑμησσός—Ὑμηττός) out
of the very heart of her, in full view of yourselves
and the other letters. But why mention this? He
has turned me out of all Thessaly, wanting it called
Thettaly, has swept me from the sea (θάλασσα—ϑάλαττα) and “has not even spared me the beets
(σεύτλια—τεύτλια) in my garden, so that, to quote the
proverb, he hasn’t even left me a peg (πάσσαλος—πάτταλος). 

 
That I am a much-enduring letter, you yourselves
can testify, for I never brought Zeta to book for
taking my emerald (σμάραγδος—ζὡμάραγδος) and robbing me utterly of Smyrna,
 
nor Xi for overstepping
every treaty (συνθήκη—ξυνθήκη) with Thucydides
the historian (συγγραφεύς—ξυγγραφεύς) as his ally
(ύμμαχος—ξύμμαχος): And when my neighbour
ho was ill I forgave him not only for transplanting -
my myrtles (μυρσίνη—-μυῤῥίνη) into his own garden,
but also for cracking my crown (κόρση—κόρρη) in a
fit of insanity.

That is my disposition, but this Tau—
just see how bad-natured he is toward the others,
too! To show that he has not let the rest of the
letters alone, but has injured Delta and Theta and
Zeta and almost all the alphabet, please call to the
stand the injured parties in person. Listen, Vowels
of the jury, to Delta, who says: “He robbed me of



 

endelechy, wanting it to be called entelechy agairist
all the laws”; to Theta crying and pulling out the
hair of his head because he has had even his pumpkin
(κολοκύνθη—-κολοκύντη) taken away from him, and to
Zeta, who has lost his whistle (συρίζειν—συρίττειν) and
trumpet (σαλπίζειν—σαλπίττειν), so that he can’t even
make a sound (γρύζειν—γρύττειν) any longer. Who
could put up with all this, and what punishment
could be bad enough for this out-and-out rascal Tau ?

Not only does he injure his own kinsfolk of the
alphabet, but he has already attacked the human
race also; for he does not allow them to talk straight
with their tongues. Indeed , jurymen—for speaking of
men has suddenly put mein mind of the tongue—he
has banished me from this member too, as far as in
him lay, and makes glotta out of glossa. O Tau, thou
very plague o’ the tongue! But I shall attack him
another time and advise men of his sins against
them, in trying to fetter their speech, as it were,
and to mangle it. A man on seeing something
pretty (καλόν) wants to call it so, but Tau interferes
and makes him say something else (ταλόν),
 wanting
to have precedence in everything. Again, another
is talking about a palm-branch (κλῆμα), but Tau, the
very criminal (τλήμων), turns the palm-branch into a
crime (τλῆμα). And not only does he injure ordinary
people, but even the Great King, in whose honour,
they say, even land and sea give place and depart
from their own natures—even he is plotted against
by Tau, who instead of Cyrus makes him out something of a cheese (Κῦρος—τυρός).

That is the way he injures mankind as far as their



 

speech is concerned, but look at the material injury
he has done them! Men weep and bewail their lot
and curse Cadmus over and over for putting Tau into
the alphabet, for they say that their tyrants,
following his figure and imitating his build, have
fashioned timbers in the same shape and crucify men
upon them; and that it is from him that the sorry
device gets its sorry name (stauros, cross). For all
this do you not think that Tau deserves to die many
times over? As for me, I hold that in all justice
we can only punish Tau by making a T of him.