CHARACTERS. As slaves for sale: JUPITER . MERCURY . PYTHAGORAS . DIOGONES . DEMOKRITOS . HERAKLEITOS . SOKRATES . CHRYSIPPOS . and a PYRRONIST . Various buyers.


 


 Zeus (to his assistants) Set the benches in order, and get the place ready
for visitors; and you, range the lives
in order and usher them in, but tidy
them up first so that they may make
a good appearance and attract a crowd. You,
Hermes, make a proclamation, and, by the grace
of heaven, summon the buyers to the sale-room
forthwith. We are going to announce for sale
philosophic lives of every description and varied
principles, and if any one is not able to lay down
his money on the nail he can pay up next year if
he gives security. 


 Hermes A crowd is gathering, so we must not
waste time nor keep them waiting. 


 Zeus Then let us proceed to sell.

Hermes Which of them shall we put up first? 


 Zeus This one with the long hair, the Ionian,
for he seems to be a reverend person. 


 Hermes Let the Pythagorean there show his
points to the company. 


 Zeus Announce him, pray. 


 Hermes I offer the noblest life, the most reverend. Who will buy? Who wishes to be more


 



than human, to know the harmony of the all, and
rise from the dead? 


 Buyer He is not bad to look at, but just what
does he know? 


 Hermes Arithmetic, astronomy, magic, geometry, music, jugglery. A finished fortune-teller is
before you. 


 Buyer May one question him? 


 Hermes With all my heart.

Buyer What country are you of? 


 Pythagoras Samos. 


 Buyer Where were you educated? 


 Pythagoras In Egypt, among the sages there. 


 Buyer Well, then, if I buy you what will you
teach me? 


 Pythagoras I will not teach you anything. I
will remind you. 


 Buyer How will you remind me? 


 Pythagoras By first making your soul clean,
and washing off the filth that is on it. 


 Buyer Now, suppose me already purified, what
is your method of reminding? 


 Pythagoras The first step is a long, speechless
silence; you must not say a word for five whole
years. 


 Buyer You ought to teach mutes, my friend.
But I am a talker with no desire to become a
graven image. All the same, what comes after
the silence and the five-year term? 


 


 Pythagoras Practise in music and geometry. 


 Buyer That is a nice statement ! If I am to
become a philosopher I must first learn to play
the harp!

Pythagoras In addition to these, counting. 


 Buyer I can count now. 


 Pythagoras How do you do it? 


 Buyer One, two, three, four. 


 Pythagoras Look, now; what you deem four is
really ten, and a perfect triangle, and what we
swear by. 


 Buyer Hear me swear a mighty oath: by Four,
I never heard diviner or more holy words. 


 Pythagoras And after that, stranger, you will
have knowledge concerning earth and air and
water and fire-the mass of each, and what form
it has, and what motion by consequence. 


 Buyer Then has fire form, or air, or water? 


 Pythagoras Very clear forms, for the formless
and shapeless is immovable; and besides these
things you will know that God is number and
mind and harmony. 


 Buyer This is startling!

Pythagoras Beyond what I have already said,
you will know that you yourself, who seem to be
a unit, are one person in appearance and another
in reality. 


 Buyer What do you say? Am I somebody
else and not this person now talking to you?


 


 Pythagoras Now you are he, but formerly you
appeared in another body and with another name;
and in time you will change again into another. 


 Buyer You mean this: that I shall be immortal, changing into one form after another?
But that is enough on this subject.

What are
your habits of life? 


 Pythagoras I touch no sort of animal food, but
anything else except beans. 


 Buyer What is the reason of that? Perhaps
you dislike beans? 


 Pythagoras Not at all, but they are sacred and
of a marvellous nature. But, what is more important, it is the custom of the Athenians to vote for
officers with beans. 


 Buyer All your remarks are lofty and priestlike. But take off your clothes and let me see
you stripped. Good heavens, his thigh is golden! He seems to be a god, not a mortal. I will
buy him, by all means. How much do you ask
for him? 


 Hermes Two hundred dollars. 


 Buyer I will take him at the price. 


 Zeus Make a note of the buyer's name and
country. 


 Hermes He is an Italian, I should think, from
Croton or Tarentum, or somewhere in Magna
Graecia. But he is not the sole purchaser; almost three hundred clubbed together with him. 


 

 Zeus Let them take him off. Put
up another.

Hermes What do you say to that dirty one from
Pontos? 


 Zeus By all means. 


 Hermes Come here, you with the wallet slung
from your shoulder, and the bare arms. Walk
round the room.
I offer a manly life, a noble and generous life,
a free life! Who buys? 


 Buyer What do you say, salesman? You offer
a free man for sale? 


 Hermes I do. 


 Buyer Then are you not afraid he will sue you
for kidnapping, and bring you before the criminal
court? 


 Hermes He does not mind being sold at all,
for he believes he is free in all circumstances. 


 Buyer What use could one put such a dirty,
ill-conditioned fellow to, unless you set him to
digging or carrying water? 


 Hermes Those are not his only uses. If you
make a hall-porter of him you will find you can
rely on him better than on your dogs; in fact, he
has even the name of a dog. 


 Buyer Where does he come from and what
discipline does he profess? 


 Hermes Ask the man himself; that is the better way. 


 Buyer I am afraid of him, with his sullen, dark


 



look, lest he should bark and spring at me, and
bite me, too, by Zeus! See how he brandishes his
club, and knits his brows, and scowls beneath them
in that threatening, angry way! 


 Hermes Don't be afraid; he is tame.

Buyer In the first place, my friend, where are
you from? 


 Diogones Everywhere. 


 Buyer What do you mean? 


 Diogones You see before you a citizen of the
world. 


 Buyer And who is your model?
 


 Diogones Herakles.
 


 Buyer Then why don't you wear the lion-skin,
too? You are like him as far as the club goes. 


 Diogones This is my lion-skin, my threadbare
coat. Like him, I make war on pleasures; not
under orders, but of my own will, deliberately
choosing to purify life. 


 Buyer A noble choice! But just what are we
to understand that you know? What art are you
master of? 


 Diogones I am the liberator of mankind and
the physician of their passions; but, above all, I
wish to be the prophet of truth and free speech.

Buyer Come, prophet, if I buy you, what training will you put me through? 


 Diogones First, I will take you in hand and strip
you of your luxury, locking you up with poverty


 


and clothing you in a threadbare cloak. Next, I
will drive you to travail and toil, with the ground
for your bed, water for your drink, and for your
food whatever comes along. As for your money,
if you have any, you will carry
it down to the sea
and throw it in, if you will be guided by me, and
you will have no care for wife or child or fatherland; everything of that sort will seem trumpery
to you. You will leave your paternal house, and
take up your dwelling in a tomb, or in a deserted
tower, or even in a tub. Let your wallet be full
of pease and bescribbled books, and in this plight
you will declare yourself happier than the great
king. If any one should flog you or stretch you
on the rack you will feel no pain. 


 Buyer What do you mean by that feeling no
pain when one is flogged? I have not got the
covering of a turtle or a lobster on my shoulders! 


 Diogones You will admire that little saying of
Euripides, with a word or two altered. 


 Buyer What one? 


 Diogones Your heart will suffer, but your tongue
will feel no pain.

But the most necessary qualities are these: you must be reckless and daring,
and abuse all alike, kings and subjects. By this
means you will be noticed and thought manly.
Let your speech be uncouth, your voice discordant and strongly resembling a dog's. Wear a
strenuous face, and choose a gait in keeping with
5


 



it; and let all your ways be wild and boorish.
But let shame and reason and moderation stand
afar off, and strip your blushes from your cheeks
altogether. Haunt the most frequented spots,
and even in those let your desire be for unshared
solitude; and attach yourself to neither friend nor
stranger, for that would upset your empire. And
at last, if you see fit, eat a raw polyp or a jelly-fish,
and die. Such is the happiness we procure for you.

Buyer Be off with you! Your ways are foul
and unnatural. 


 Diogones But the easiest, at least, sirrah, and
handy for every one to pursue; for they will not
ask education of you, or oratory, or nonsense.
No; this road is a short cut to fame; for even if
you are a private citizen, a tanner, or a fishmonger, or a carpenter, or a cabinet-maker, nothing prevents your being a wonder if only you are
shameless and bold, and have acquired the art of
skilful abuse. 


 Buyer I do not want your services in that line,
but you might perhaps be convenient as a sailor
or a gardener-particularly if the vendor is willing to sell you for not more than five cents. 


 Hermes Take him; we shall be glad to get rid
of him. He is a nuisance, yelling and abusing
everybody generally with his foul tongue.

Zeus Call another, the Cyrenaic, the one in the
purple robe with the garland on his head.


 

 Hermes Come now, attention, all! This article is expensive, and only for the rich. This is
a life of sweetness, a thrice-blessed life! Who
wants luxury? Who will buy the daintiest thing
going? 


 Buyer Step forward, you, and tell me what you
happen to know. I will buy you if you are useful. 


 Hermes Do not annoy him, my good fellow, or
ask him questions. He is drunk and cannot answer you, for his tongue is thick, as you perceive. 


 Buyer And who in his senses would buy such
an abandoned, dissipated slave? How he reeks
of perfumes, and how reeling and uncertain his
gait is! But tell me yourself, Hermes, if need be,
what his points are, and what his pursuits. 


 Hermes Primarily he is a clever man to live
with you, able to drink with you, and just the
man to go with a flute-girl on the revels of an
amorous and spendthrift master. Moreover, he
is a connoisseur of made dishes, a most experienced cook, and a complete professor of the art
of pleasant living. In fact, he was educated at
Athens, and also served various despots in Sicily,
and is highly esteemed by them. This is the substance of his principles: to despise everything,
make use of everything, and gather pleasure from
every source. 


 Buyer You had better cast your eye on some


 



one of these rich men with full purses. Certainly
for buying a gay life I am not your man. 


 Hermes It looks, Zeus, as though this one would
be left on your hands.

Zeus Set him aside and put up another. These
two, for choice, the laugher from Abdera and the
weeper from Ephesus, for I should like to sell the
two together. 


 Hermes Let them come down into full view.
I offer the noblest lives; we announce the sagest
of all! 


 Buyer Heavens, what a contrast! The one
never stops laughing, and the other seems to be
in grief for somebody. He is consumed with
weeping.
What is the matter, fellow? Why are you
laughing? 

 Demokritos What a question! Because all your
doings and you yourselves strike me as so
funny! 


 Buyer What? You are laughing at us all, and
don't take our doings seriously? 


 Demokritos Even so, for there is nothing serious in them. They are all empty, a whirl of
atoms, the infinite. 


 Buyer By no means; it is you that are really
empty and infinitesimal. What impudence! Will
you not stop laughing?

But what are you weeping for, my good fellow?


 


I imagine it will be much pleasanter to talk with
you. 


 Herakleitos Because, friend, I deem human life
a lamentable thing, worthy of tears, so soon passeth it all away. Therefore, I pity you and bewail
your lot. The present does not strike me as important, and what is to come hereafter is unmixed
woe-I mean the final conflagration and the catastrophe of the universe. These are the things I
lament. Nothing is steadfast, but all things are
somehow pressed together into an olla-podrïda
and the same thing is a joyless joy, a knowing
without knowledge, a great littleness, drifting up
and down and changing at the caprice of the
playful Aeon. 


 Buyer What may the Aeon be? 


 Herakleitos A child at play, moving the chessmen, changing them by hazard. 


 Buyer What, then, are men? 


 Herakleitos Mortal gods. 


 Buyer And what are the gods? 


 Herakleitos Immortal men. 


 Buyer Are you talking in riddles, fellow, or
setting me conundrums? You make your meaning as dim, actually, as Apollo does. 


 Herakleitos Because I am at no pains about
you. 


 Buyer Very well; neither will any but a lunatic
buy you.


 


 Herakleitos I bid each of you go to the devil
from his youth up, whether he purchase or purchase not. 


 Buyer His affliction is not much removed from
melancholia. For my part, I am not going to buy
either of them. 


 Hermes These two are left on our hands. 


 Zeus Put up another!

Hermes That Athenian there, the chatterbox? 


 Zeus By all means. 


 Hermes Come here, you! We offer a good,
sensible life. Who buys the most holy? 


 Buyer Tell me, just what do you happen to
know? 


 Sokrates I am a lover and wise in the science
of love. 


 Buyer Then how in the world could I buy
you? For what I want is a tutor for my pretty
boy. 


 Sokrates Well, who could be a better man than
I to associate with the fair? It is beautiful souls
that I love, not bodies.

Indeed, I swear it to you
by the dog and the plane-tree. 


 Buyer Heavens, what strange gods! 


 Sokrates What's that you say? Don't you
think the dog is a god? Perhaps you have not
noticed how great Anoubis is in Egypt, and
Seirios in the heavens, and Kerberos among the
dead.

Buyer You are right, it was my mistake. But
what is your manner of life? 


 Sokrates I live by myself in a sort of state that
I fashioned with a foreign form of government,
and I enact my own laws. 


 Buyer I should like to hear one of your principles. 


 Sokrates Well, this is the most important: my
decision about women. No woman is assigned
to one man alone, but to every one who wishes
her in marriage.
Have you, then, abrogated the laws about marriage?
 


 Buyer What!
 


 Sokrates Dear me, yes, and all such petty formalities. Beauty shall be the reward of the bravest-those who have accomplished some brilliant
feat of daring.

Buyer A fine reward! And what is the substance of your philosophy? 


 Sokrates The ideas and the types of existing
things; for, indeed, everything that you see-the
earth and all upon it, the sky, the sea-all these
things have invisible images outside the universe. 


 Buyer Where are they? 


 Sokrates Nowhere; for if they were anywhere
they could not be. 


 Buyer I don't see these types you speak of. 


 Sokrates Naturally; for your soul's eye is blind.


 



But I see the images of all things: an invisible
you, another me, and everything double. 


 Buyer Then you will do to buy, for you are
wise and have good eyes.
Come, Hermes, how much will you charge me
for him? 


 Hermes Two thousand dollars. 


 Buyer I take him at the price. However, I
will pay you later.

Hermes What is your name? 


 Buyer Dion of Syracuse. 


 Hermes Take him, with my best wishes.
Next I call you, the Epicurean. Who will buy
this one? He is the pupil of that laugher and of
the drunkard whom I offered a little while ago.
But he has made one step in advance of them, inasmuch as he has less regard for holy things.
For the rest, he is pleasant and the friend of good
living. 


 Buyer What's the price? 


 Hermes Forty dollars. 


 Buyer Here you are. But tell me what sort
of food he likes. 


 Hermes He lives on sweet things like honey,
and particularly figs. 


 Buyer That is easy enough. I will buy him
penny-loaves of fig-cake.

Zeus Call up another-that scowling fellow
with the shaved head from the Porch.


 
 


 Hermes Very well. At all events, a great crowd
of those who have come to the sale seem to be
waiting for him. I offer for sale virtue herself,
the most perfect of lives. Who wishes to know
everything, alone of all men? 


 Buyer What do you mean? 


 Hermes This man alone is wise, he alone is
beautiful, he alone is just, manly, a king, an orator, a millionaire, a legislator, and everything else. 


 Buyer Then, friend, is he alone a cook, and a
tanner, by Jove! and a carpenter, and everything
of that sort? 


 Hermes Apparently.

Buyer Come, my friend, and tell me, your purchaser, what sort of person you are, and, to begin
with, whether it is not an affliction to you to be
sold and in slavery. 


 Chrysippos Not at all; for those things are not
under our control, and what is not under our control is therefore indifferent. 


 Buyer I don't understand just what you mean. 


 Chrysippos What, do you not understand that
in such matters some things are preferred and
some again rejected? 


 Buyer I don't understand even yet. 


 Chrysippos Naturally, for you are not accustomed to our terminology, nor have you the perceptive imagination. But the virtuous man, he
who has mastered logical theory, knows not only


 



these things, but also the nature of an accident
and a secondary accident, and how much difference there is between them. 


 Buyer In the name of wisdom, kindly take the
trouble to tell me this, too: what accidents and
secondary accidents are. I am indescribably impressed by the roll of the words. 


 Chrysippos No trouble at all. If a lame man,
stumbling with that lame foot itself against a
stone gets unexpectedly hurt, this man's lameness is evidently a primary accident to which
he adds a secondary accident in the way of the
wound.

Buyer What else, now, do you claim to know? 

 Buyer How clever!
 


 Chrysippos The meshes of argument wherewith
I trip up my interlocutors and block their passage
and reduce them to silence by actually muzzling
them. The name of this faculty is the famous
syllogism. 


 Buyer By Herkules, it is an irresistible, mighty
weapon, from your description. 


 Chrysippos I will give you a specimen. Have
you a child? 


 Buyer Certainly. 


 Chrysippos If a crocodile should manage to
snatch it, finding it wandering too near the river,
and if, then, he should promise to restore it if you
could tell him truly whether he had determined


 


to give it back or not, what would you tell him
he had in mind? 


 Buyer That is a difficult question, for I do not
see which answer would be the more likely to get
the child back. But do you, in Heaven's name,
answer for me, and save my child before he eats
him. 


 Chrysippos Never fear, I will teach you other
things still more surprising. 


 Buyer What sort of things? 


 Chrysippos The Reaper, the Master, and, above
all, the Elektra, and the Veiled. 


 Buyer What do you mean by the "Veiled," or
the "Elektra ?" 


 Chrysippos Elektra is that famous person, the
daughter of Agamemnon, who at the same moment knows a thing and does not know it; for
when Orestes stands beside her, still incognito,
she knows, indeed, that Orestes is her brother,
but that this is Orestes she does not know. And
I will tell you about the "Veiled," too, a most extraordinary figure. Answer me, do you know your
father? 


 Buyer Yes. 


 Chrysippos Well, then, if I present some veiled
person to you and ask whether you know him,
what would you say? 


 Buyer That I do not, of course.

Chrysippos And yet this very person was your


 



father! Therefore, if you do not know him, it is
plain you do not know your father. 


 Buyer Not at all, for if I unveil him I shall
know the truth. However, what is the object of
your philosophy? What do you do when you
have reached the pinnacle of virtue? 


 Chrysippos I shall then be occupied with the
first things in the order of nature-riches, I mean,
and health, and such like things. But before
that one must needs toil much, sharpening his
sight on books in fine print, taking notes, and filling himself with solecisms aand uncouth phrases.
Most important of all, it is not permitted to become a sage until you have drunk hellebore three
times in succession. 


 Buyer This is all very noble in you and extremely manly. But what are we to say when a
man, who has already drunk the hellebore and arrived at virtue, turns money - lender at fifty per
cent., for I see this belongs to your principles too? 


 Chrysippos By all means. The sage is the only
man fit to lend money; for since ratiocination
is his peculiar function, and calculating ratios and
per cents. seems to be the next thing to ratiocinating, it follows from these premises that the
special business of the good man alone is to get
not only simple interest like other people, but
compound. For you know there are two sorts of
interest, one sort coming first, and the other second,


 

as it were the offspring of the first, and of
course you see what the syllogism has to say
about it if he gets the simple interest, he will
also get the compound, but he does get the simple interest, therefore he will also get the compound.

Buyer And must we say the same of the fees
you take for imparting your wisdom to young
men? Is it clear that the good man alone will
make money out of his virtue? 


 Chrysippos You grasp the idea. It is not on
my own account that I take fees, but for the good
of the giver himself. For since one party in a
transaction must give and the other receive, I
train myself to receive and my pupil to give. 


 Buyer It ought to be the other way about.
The young man ought to receive, and you, who
alone are rich, to give out. 


 Chrysippos You are chaffing, fellow; but be
careful lest I let fly at you with the apodeiktic
syllogism. 


 Buyer What are the frightful effects of the
weapon? 


 Chrysippos Embarrassment, silence, confusion
of mind.

If you like, I will give you an extreme
example, and prove in a twinkling that you are a
stone. 


 Buyer How a stone? You do not look to me
like Perseus with the Gorgon's head, my friend.


 


 Chrysippos This is the way. Is the stone a
body? 

 Buyer Yes. 


 Chrysippos Well, is not a living creature a
body? 


 Buyer Yes. 


 Chrysippos But you are a living creature? 


 Buyer Certainly, I have that appearance. 


 Chrysippos Then you are a stone, for you are
a body. 


 Buyer Heaven forbid! In Zeus' name, release
me and make me a man again! 


 Chrysippos That is easy; be a man once more.
For, tell me, is every body a living creature? 


 Buyer No. 


 Chrysippos Well, is a stone a living creature? 


 Buyer No. 


 Chrysippos But you are a body? 


 Buyer Yes. 


 Chrysippos And being a body you are a living
creature? 


 Buyer Yes. 


 Chrysippos Then you are not a stone, because
you are a living creature. 


 Buyer Thank you. My legs were getting lifeless already and stiff, like Niobe's. But I am
certainly going to buy you. What is his price? 


 Hermes Two hundred and forty dollars. 


 Buyer Here it is.


 
 


 Hermes Are you the sole purchaser ? 


 Buyer Dear me, no. All these people are
with me. 


 Hermes There are plenty of them, and strong
in the shoulder. They are fit for "the Mower."

Zeus Don't waste time. Call up another, the
Peripatetic. 


 Hermes You are the man I want-the handsome, the rich one.
Come now, buy the most intelligent life-the
one whose forte is omniscience! 


 Buyer What sort of a person is he? 


 Hermes He leads a reasonable, well-ordered
life, never doing either too much or too little.
Most important of all, he is double. 


 Buyer What do you mean? 


 Hermes It seems that his visible man is one
person and his inward man another; so, if you
buy him, remember to call the one "exoteric,"
the other "esoteric." 


 Buyer What does he know best? 


 Hermes That there are three classes of goods,
relating to the soul, the body, and to externals. 


 Buyer He thinks like a human being. What
is his price? 


 Hermes Three hundred and seventy-five dollars. 


 Buyer That is high.


 


 Hermes No, my good fellow, for he seems to
have some money himself, so you can't buy him
too quickly. Moreover, you will presently learn
from him how long the gnat lives, how far down
the sea is lighted by the sun, and the nature of
the soul of the oyster. 


 Buyer Herakles! there's precision for you. 


 Hermes What would you say if you should
hear things a great deal shrewder than these—
how man is a laughing animal, but the ass neither
a laughing, nor a house-building, nor a seafaring
animal? 


 Buyer Edifying and profitable knowledge! I
will take him for four hundred dollars.

Hermes Done. 


 Zeus Whom have we still left? 


 Hermes The sceptic here. Come forward,
Pyrrhias, and be published as fast as you can.
Most of the people have already stolen away, and
there will be few buyers. All the same, who wants
this fellow, too? 


 Buyer I do. But first tell me, what is your
line of knowledge? 


 Philosopher Nothing. 


 Buyer What do you mean by that? 


 Philosopher That in my opinion nothing at all
exists. 


 Buyer Then are we nobody, too? 


 Philosopher I don't even know that.


 

 Buyer Nor whether you happen to be somebody, either? 


 Philosopher I am still more ignorant of that,
by a good deal. 


 Buyer What an uncertainty! But, tell me,
what do you want with these balances? 


 Philosopher I weigh arguments in them and
get them even, and when I see them exactly equal
and of the same weight, then I am ignorant which
is the truer. 


 Buyer What else are you clever at? 


 Philosopher Everything, except chasing a runaway slave. 


 Buyer Why can't you do that? 


 Philosopher Because, good sir, I never appresee.
hend. 


 Buyer Of course. You do seem to be a slow,
dull person. But what is the aim of your science? 


 Philosopher Ignorance; neither to hear nor to apprehend. 

 Buyer You mean, then, to be blind and deaf? 


 Philosopher Yes, and incapable of judgment
and sensation, and, in a word, the double of an
earthworm. 


 Buyer I must buy you for that. How much
do you say
he is worth? 


 Hermes Twenty dollars. 


 Buyer Here it is. What have you to say, fellow? Have I bought you?



 


 Philosopher Doubtful. 


 Buyer Not at all. I have purchased you and
paid the money. 


 Philosopher I suspend my judgment about it
and consider. 


 Buyer You will follow me, as my slave should. 


 Philosopher Who knows whether you are telling the truth? 


 Buyer The salesman and the eighteen dollars
and the by-standers. 


 Philosopher Are there, then, any standing by? 


 Buyer I will clap you into the mill in a moment, and persuade you by a vicious argument
that I am your master. 


 Philosopher Suspend your judgment about
that. 


 Buyer No, by Heaven, I have formed my opinion already! 


 Hermes Here, stop your resistance and follow
your purchaser.
We will summon you again to-morrow, for we
are going to put up the lives of the private citizens and artisans and tradesfolk.