Adam, Seth, Enosh,

Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,

Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech,

Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Diphath, and Togarmah.

The sons of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim.

The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.

The sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raama, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah: Sheba, and Dedan.

Cush became the father of Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

Mizraim became the father of Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,

and Pathrusim, and Casluhim (from whence came the Philistines), and Caphtorim.

Canaan became the father of Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,

and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,

and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,

and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.

The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.

Arpachshad became the father of Shelah, and Shelah became the father of Eber.

To Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg; for in his days the earth was divided; and his brother’s name was Joktan.

Joktan became the father of Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,

and Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.

Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah,

Eber, Peleg, Reu,

Serug, Nahor, Terah,

Abram (the same is Abraham).

The sons of Abraham: Isaac, and Ishmael.

These are their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,

Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.

The sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she bore Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba, and Dedan.

The sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.

Abraham became the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau, and Israel.

The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah.

The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.

The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.

The sons of Seir: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan.

The sons of Lotan: Hori, and Homam; and Timna was Lotan’s sister.

The sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah, and Anah.

The sons of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.

The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, and Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz, and Aran.

Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom, before there resigned any king over the children of Israel: Bela the son of Beor; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.

Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his place.

Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his place.

Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who struck Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his place; and the name of his city was Avith.

Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his place.

Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his place.

Shaul died, and Baal Hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his place.

Baal Hanan died, and Hadad reigned in his place; and the name of his city was Pai: and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.

Hadad died. The chiefs of Edom were: chief Timna, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,

chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,

chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,

chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.

These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun,

Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

The sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah; which three were born to him of Shua’s daughter the Canaanitess. Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Yahweh; and he killed him.

Tamar his daughter-in-law bore him Perez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.

The sons of Perez: Hezron, and Hamul.

The sons of Zerah: Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara; five of them in all.

The sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who committed a trespass in the devoted thing.

The sons of Ethan: Azariah.

The sons also of Hezron, who were born to him: Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.

Ram became the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab became the father of Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah;

and Nahshon became the father of Salma, and Salma became the father of Boaz,

and Boaz became the father of Obed, and Obed became the father of Jesse;

and Jesse became the father of his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third,

Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,

Ozem the sixth, David the seventh;

and their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. The sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.

Abigail bore Amasa; and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.

Caleb the son of Hezron became the father of [children] of Azubah [his] wife, and of Jerioth; and these were her sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.

Azubah died, and Caleb took to him Ephrath, who bore him Hur.

Hur became the father of Uri, and Uri became the father of Bezalel.

Afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he took [as wife] when he was sixty years old; and she bore him Segub.

Segub became the father of Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.

Geshur and Aram took the towns of Jair from them, with Kenath, and the villages of it, even sixty cities. All these were the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.

After that Hezron was dead in Caleb Ephrathah, then Abijah Hezron’s wife bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.

The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, Ahijah.

Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.

The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.

The sons of Onam were Shammai, and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab, and Abishur.

The name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail; and she bore him Ahban, and Molid.

The sons of Nadab: Seled, and Appaim; but Seled died without children.

The sons of Appaim: Ishi. The sons of Ishi: Sheshan. The sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.

The sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether, and Jonathan; and Jether died without children.

The sons of Jonathan: Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.

Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.

Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant as wife; and she bore him Attai.

Attai became the father of Nathan, and Nathan became the father of Zabad,

and Zabad became the father of Ephlal, and Ephlal became the father of Obed,

and Obed became the father of Jehu, and Jehu became the father of Azariah,

and Azariah became the father of Helez, and Helez became the father of Eleasah,

and Eleasah became the father of Sismai, and Sismai became the father of Shallum,

and Shallum became the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah became the father of Elishama.

The sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.

The sons of Hebron: Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.

Shema became the father of Raham, the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem became the father of Shammai.

The son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of Beth Zur.

Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, bore Haran, and Moza, and Gazez; and Haran became the father of Gazez.

The sons of Jahdai: Regem, and Jothan, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.

Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.

She bore also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbena, and the father of Gibea; and the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.

These were the sons of Caleb, the son of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim,

Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth Gader.

Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim had sons: Haroeh, half of the Menuhoth.

The families of Kiriath Jearim: The Ithrites, and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.

The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, and the Netophathites, Atroth Beth Joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.

The families of scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came of Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.

Now these were the sons of David, who were born to him in Hebron: the firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;

the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;

the fifth, Shephatiah of Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife:

six were born to him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven years and six months. In Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years;

and these were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bathshua the daughter of Ammiel;

and Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,

and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.

All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines; and Tamar was their sister.

Solomon’s son was Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,

Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,

Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,

Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,

Amon his son, Josiah his son.

The sons of Josiah: the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.

The sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.

The sons of Jeconiah, the captive: Shealtiel his son,

and Malchiram, and Pedaiah, and Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.

The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel, and Shimei. The sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam, and Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;

and Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed, five.

The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah.

The sons of Shecaniah: Shemaiah. The sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Igal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.

The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, and Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three.

The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, seven.

The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.

Reaiah the son of Shobal became the father of Jahath; and Jahath became the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.

These were [the sons of] the father of Etam: Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi;

and Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah, the father of Bethlehem.

Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.

Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.

The sons of Helah were Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan.

Hakkoz became the father of Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.

Jabez was more honorable than his brothers: and his mother named him Jabez, saying, Because I bore him with sorrow.

Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that you would bless me indeed, and enlarge my border, and that your hand might be with me, and that you would keep me from evil, that it not be to my sorrow! God granted him that which he requested.

Chelub the brother of Shuhah became the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.

Eshton became the father of Beth Rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir Nahash. These are the men of Recah.

The sons of Kenaz: Othniel, and Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath.

Meonothai became the father of Ophrah: and Seraiah became the father of Joab the father of Ge Harashim; for they were craftsmen.

The sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and the sons of Elah; and Kenaz.

The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.

The sons of Ezrah: Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon; and she bore Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.

His wife the Jewess bore Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. These are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took.

The sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.

The sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben Hanan, and Tilon. The sons of Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben Zoheth.

The sons of Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of those who worked fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;

and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. The records are ancient.

These were the potters, and the inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah: there they lived with the king for his work.

The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;

Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.

The sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.

Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brothers didn’t have many children, neither did all their family multiply like the children of Judah.

They lived at Beersheba, and Moladah, and Hazarshual,

and at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,

and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,

and at Beth Marcaboth, and Hazar Susim, and at Beth Biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities to the reign of David.

Their villages were Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities;

and all their villages that were round about the same cities, to Baal. These were their habitations, and they have their genealogy.

Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah,

and Joel, and Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,

and Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,

and Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah—

these mentioned by name were princes in their families: and their fathers’ houses increased greatly.

They went to the entrance of Gedor, even to the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.

They found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for those who lived there before were of Ham.

These written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and struck their tents, and the Meunim who were found there, and destroyed them utterly to this day, and lived in their place; because there was pasture there for their flocks.

Some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to Mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.

They struck the remnant of the Amalekites who escaped, and have lived there to this day.

The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (for he was the firstborn; but, because he defiled his father’s couch, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel; and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.

For Judah prevailed above his brothers, and of him came the prince; but the birthright was Joseph’s:)

the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.

The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,

Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,

Beerah his son, whom Tilgath Pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive: he was prince of the Reubenites.

His brothers by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned: the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,

and Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who lived in Aroer, even to Nebo and Baal Meon:

and eastward he lived even to the entrance of the wilderness from the river Euphrates, because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.

In the days of Saul, they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hand; and they lived in their tents throughout all the [land] east of Gilead.

The sons of Gad lived over against them, in the land of Bashan to Salecah:

Joel the chief, and Shapham the second, and Janai, and Shaphat in Bashan.

Their brothers of their fathers’ houses: Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zia, and Eber, seven.

These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;

Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of their fathers’ houses.

They lived in Gilead in Bashan, and in its towns, and in all the suburbs of Sharon, as far as their borders.

All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.

The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skillful in war, were forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty, that were able to go forth to war.

They made war with the Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab.

They were helped against them, and the Hagrites were delivered into their hand, and all who were with them; for they cried to God in the battle, and he was entreated of them, because they put their trust in him.

They took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred fifty thousand, and of donkeys two thousand, and of men one hundred thousand.

For there fell many slain, because the war was of God. They lived in their place until the captivity.

The children of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land: they increased from Bashan to Baal Hermon and Senir and Mount Hermon.

These were the heads of their fathers’ houses: even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valor, famous men, heads of their fathers’ houses.

They trespassed against the God of their fathers, and played the prostitute after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God destroyed before them.

The God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath Pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river of Gozan, to this day.

The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.

The children of Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

Eleazar became the father of Phinehas, Phinehas became the father of Abishua,

and Abishua became the father of Bukki, and Bukki became the father of Uzzi,

and Uzzi became the father of Zerahiah, and Zerahiah became the father of Meraioth,

Meraioth became the father of Amariah, and Amariah became the father of Ahitub,

and Ahitub became the father of Zadok, and Zadok became the father of Ahimaaz,

and Ahimaaz became the father of Azariah, and Azariah became the father of Johanan,

and Johanan became the father of Azariah, (he it is who executed the priest’s office in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem),

and Azariah became the father of Amariah, and Amariah became the father of Ahitub,

and Ahitub became the father of Zadok, and Zadok became the father of Shallum,

and Shallum became the father of Hilkiah, and Hilkiah became the father of Azariah,

and Azariah became the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah became the father of Jehozadak;

Jehozadak went [into captivity], when Yahweh carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.

These are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.

The sons of Kohath were Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.

The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their fathers’ [houses].

Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,

Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.

The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,

Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,

Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.

The sons of Elkanah: Amasai, and Ahimoth.

As for Elkanah, the sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,

Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.

The sons of Samuel: the firstborn [Joel], and the second Abijah.

The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,

Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

These are they whom David set over the service of song in the house of Yahweh, after that the ark had rest.

They ministered with song before the tent of the tent of meeting, until Solomon had built the house of Yahweh in Jerusalem: and they waited on their office according to their order.

These are those who waited, and their sons. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,

the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,

the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,

the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,

the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,

the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.

His brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea,

the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,

the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,

the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,

the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.

On the left hand their brothers the sons of Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,

the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,

the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,

the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.

Their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tent of the house of God.

But Aaron and his sons offered on the altar of burnt offering, and on the altar of incense, for all the work of the most holy place, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.

These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,

Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,

Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,

Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.

Now these are their dwelling-places according to their encampments in their borders: to the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites (for theirs was the [first] lot),

to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs of it round about it;

but the fields of the city, and the villages of it, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

To the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, Hebron; Libnah also with its suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with its suburbs,

and Hilen with its suburbs, Debir with its suburbs,

and Ashan with its suburbs, and Beth-shemesh with its suburbs;

and out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba with its suburbs, and Allemeth with its suburbs, and Anathoth with its suburbs. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.

To the rest of the sons of Kohath [were given] by lot, out of the family of the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities.

To the sons of Gershom, according to their families, out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.

To the sons of Merari [were given] by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.

The children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities with their suburbs.

They gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities which are mentioned by name.

Some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim.

They gave to them the cities of refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim with its suburbs; Gezer also with its suburbs,

and Jokmeam with its suburbs, and Beth Horon with its suburbs,

and Aijalon with its suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with its suburbs;

and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Aner with its suburbs, and Bileam with its suburbs, for the rest of the family of the sons of Kohath.

To the sons of Gershom [were given], out of the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its suburbs, and Ashtaroth with its suburbs;

and out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedesh with its suburbs, Daberath with its suburbs,

and Ramoth with its suburbs, and Anem with its suburbs;

and out of the tribe of Asher, Mashal with its suburbs, and Abdon with its suburbs,

and Hukok with its suburbs, and Rehob with its suburbs;

and out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its suburbs, and Hammon with its suburbs, and Kiriathaim with its suburbs.

To the rest of [the Levites], the sons of Merari, [were given], out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with its suburbs, Tabor with its suburbs;

and beyond the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, [were given them], out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with its suburbs, and Jahzah with its suburbs,

and Kedemoth with its suburbs, and Mephaath with its suburbs;

and out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its suburbs, and Mahanaim with its suburbs,

and Heshbon with its suburbs, and Jazer with its suburbs.

Of the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four.

The sons of Tola: Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their fathers’ houses, [to wit], of Tola; mighty men of valor in their generations: their number in the days of David was twenty-two thousand six hundred.

The sons of Uzzi: Izrahiah. The sons of Izrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief men.

With them, by their generations, after their fathers’ houses, were bands of the host for war, thirty-six thousand; for they had many wives and sons.

Their brothers among all the families of Issachar, mighty men of valor, reckoned in all by genealogy, were eighty-seven thousand.

[The sons of] Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.

The sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of fathers’ houses, mighty men of valor; and they were reckoned by genealogy twenty-two thousand thirty-four.

The sons of Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.

They were reckoned by genealogy, after their generations, heads of their fathers’ houses, mighty men of valor, twenty thousand two hundred.

The sons of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tarshish, and Ahishahar.

All these were sons of Jediael, according to the heads of their fathers’ [houses], mighty men of valor, seventeen thousand and two hundred, who were able to go forth in the host for war.

Shuppim also, and Huppim, the sons of Ir, Hushim, the sons of Aher.

The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.

The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his concubine the Aramitess bore: she bore Machir the father of Gilead:

and Machir took a wife of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s name was Maacah; and the name of the second was Zelophehad: and Zelophehad had daughters.

Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she named him Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.

The sons of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.

His sister Hammolecheth bore Ishhod, and Abiezer, and Mahlah.

The sons of Shemida were Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.

The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his son, and Tahath his son,

and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath who were born in the land killed, because they came down to take away their cattle.

Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brothers came to comfort him.

He went in to his wife, and she conceived, and bore a son, and he named him Beriah, because it went evil with his house.

His daughter was Sheerah, who built Beth Horon the lower and the upper, and Uzzen Sheerah.

Rephah was his son, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son,

Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,

Nun his son, Joshua his son.

Their possessions and habitations were Bethel and the towns of it, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns of it; Shechem also and the towns of it, to Azzah and the towns of it;

and by the borders of the children of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, Dor and its towns. In these lived the children of Joseph the son of Israel.

The sons of Asher: Imnah, and Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.

The sons of Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.

Heber became the father of Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.

The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet.

The sons of Shemer: Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.

The sons of Helem his brother: Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.

The sons of Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,

Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.

The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispa, and Ara.

The sons of Ulla: Arah, and Hanniel, and Rizia.

All these were the children of Asher, heads of the fathers’ houses, choice and mighty men of valor, chief of the princes. The number of them reckoned by genealogy for service in war was twenty-six thousand men.

Benjamin became the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,

Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

Bela had sons: Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,

and Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,

and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.

These are the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of fathers’ [houses] of the inhabitants of Geba, and they carried them captive to Manahath:

and Naaman, and Ahijah, and Gera, he carried them captive: and he became the father of Uzza and Ahihud.

Shaharaim became the father of children in the field of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.

He became the father of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcam,

and Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers’ [houses].

Of Hushim he became the father of Abitub and Elpaal.

The sons of Elpaal: Eber, and Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono and Lod, with the towns of it;

and Beriah, and Shema, who were heads of fathers’ [houses] of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who put to flight the inhabitants of Gath;

and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,

and Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder,

and Michael, and Ishpah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah,

and Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hizki, and Heber,

and Ishmerai, and Izliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal,

and Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,

and Elienai, and Zillethai, and Eliel,

and Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimei,

and Ishpan, and Eber, and Eliel,

and Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,

and Hananiah, and Elam, and Anthothijah,

and Iphdeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak,

and Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,

and Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.

These were heads of fathers’ [houses] throughout their generations, chief men: these lived in Jerusalem.

In Gibeon there lived the father of Gibeon, [Jeiel], whose wife’s name was Maacah;

and his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,

and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher.

Mikloth became the father of Shimeah. They also lived with their brothers in Jerusalem, over against their brothers.

Ner became the father of Kish; and Kish became the father of Saul; and Saul became the father of Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.

The son of Jonathan was Merib Baal; and Merib Baal became the father of Micah.

The sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.

Ahaz became the father of Jehoaddah; and Jehoaddah became the father of Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri became the father of Moza.

Moza became the father of Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.

Azel had six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.

The sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.

The sons of Ulam were mighty men of valor, archers, and had many sons, and sons’ sons, one hundred fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.

So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel: and Judah was carried away captive to Babylon for their disobedience.

Now the first inhabitants who lived in their possessions in their cities were Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.

In Jerusalem lived of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim and Manasseh:

Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Perez the son of Judah.

Of the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.

Of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their brothers, six hundred ninety.

Of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah,

and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;

and their brothers, according to their generations, nine hundred fifty-six. All these men were heads of fathers’ [houses] by their fathers’ houses.

Of the priests: Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, Jachin,

and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;

and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;

and their brothers, heads of their fathers’ houses, one thousand seven hundred sixty; very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.

Of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;

and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph,

and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites.

The porters: Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brothers (Shallum was the chief),

who hitherto [waited] in the king’s gate eastward: they were the porters for the camp of the children of Levi.

Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brothers, of his father’s house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent: and their fathers had been over the camp of Yahweh, keepers of the entry.

Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in time past, [and] Yahweh was with him.

Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the tent of meeting.

All these who were chosen to be porters in the thresholds were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their office of trust.

So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the house of Yahweh, even the house of the tent, by wards.

On the four sides were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south.

Their brothers, in their villages, were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them:

for the four chief porters, who were Levites, were in an office of trust, and were over the chambers and over the treasuries in the house of God.

They lodged round about the house of God, because the charge [of it] was on them; and to them pertained the opening of it morning by morning.

Certain of them had charge of the vessels of service; for by count were these brought in and by count were these taken out.

Some of them also were appointed over the furniture, and over all the vessels of the sanctuary, and over the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.

Some of the sons of the priests prepared the confection of the spices.

Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the office of trust over the things that were baked in pans.

Some of their brothers, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the show bread, to prepare it every Sabbath.

These are the singers, heads of fathers’ [houses] of the Levites, [who lived] in the chambers [and were] free [from other service]; for they were employed in their work day and night.

These were heads of fathers’ [houses] of the Levites, throughout their generations, chief men: these lived at Jerusalem.

In Gibeon there lived the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife’s name was Maacah:

and his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,

and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.

Mikloth became the father of Shimeam. They also lived with their brothers in Jerusalem, over against their brothers.

Ner became the father of Kish; and Kish became the father of Saul; and Saul became the father of Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.

The son of Jonathan was Merib Baal; and Merib Baal became the father of Micah.

The sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, [and Ahaz].

Ahaz became the father of Jarah; and Jarah became the father of Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri became the father of Moza;

and Moza became the father of Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.

Azel had six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these were the sons of Azel.

Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain on Mount Gilboa.

The Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of Saul.

The battle went sore against Saul, and the archers overtook him; and he was distressed by reason of the archers.

Then said Saul to his armor-bearer, Draw your sword, and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armor-bearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell on it.

When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell on his sword, and died.

So Saul died, and his three sons; and all his house died together.

When all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and lived in them.

It happened on the next day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.

They stripped him, and took his head, and his armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry the news to their idols, and to the people.

They put his armor in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the house of Dagon.

When all Jabesh Gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,

all the valiant men arose, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

So Saul died for his trespass which he committed against Yahweh, because of the word of Yahweh, which he didn’t keep; and also because he asked counsel of one who had a familiar spirit, to inquire [thereby],

and didn’t inquire of Yahweh: therefore he killed him, and turned the kingdom to David the son of Jesse.

Then all Israel gathered themselves to David to Hebron, saying, Behold, we are your bone and your flesh.

In times past, even when Saul was king, it was you who led out and brought in Israel: and Yahweh your God said to you, You shall be shepherd of my people Israel, and you shall be prince over my people Israel.

So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Yahweh; and they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of Yahweh by Samuel.

David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (the same is Jebus); and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there.

The inhabitants of Jebus said to David, You shall not come in here. Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.

David said, Whoever strikes the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. Joab the son of Zeruiah went up first, and was made chief.

David lived in the stronghold; therefore they called it the city of David.

He built the city round about, from Millo even round about; and Joab repaired the rest of the city.

David grew greater and greater; for Yahweh of Hosts was with him.

Now these are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who shown themselves strong with him in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of Yahweh concerning Israel.

This is the number of the mighty men whom David had: Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the thirty; he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them at one time.

After him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men.

He was with David at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a plot of ground full of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.

They stood in the midst of the plot, and defended it, and killed the Philistines; and Yahweh saved them by a great victory.

Three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to David, into the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines were encamped in the valley of Rephaim.

David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.

David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me water to drink of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!

The three broke through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: but David would not drink of it, but poured it out to Yahweh,

and said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this: shall I drink the blood of these men who have put their lives in jeopardy? for with [the jeopardy of] their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men.

Abishai, the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three; for he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them, and had a name among the three.

Of the three, he was more honorable than the two, and was made their captain: however he didn’t attain to the [first] three.

Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two [sons of] Ariel of Moab: he went down also and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.

He killed an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high; and in the Egyptian’s hand was a spear like a weaver’s beam; and he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and killed him with his own spear.

These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had a name among the three mighty men.

Behold, he was more honorable than the thirty, but he didn’t attain to the [first] three: and David set him over his guard.

Also the mighty men of the armies: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,

Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,

Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,

Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,

Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,

Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,

Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,

Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,

the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagee the Hararite,

Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,

Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,

Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,

Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri,

Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armor bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,

Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,

Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,

Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,

Hanan the son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,

Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,

Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,

Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,

Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

Now these are those who came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish; and they were among the mighty men, his helpers in war.

They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in slinging stones and in shooting arrows from the bow: they were of Saul’s brothers of Benjamin.

The chief was Ahiezer; then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite, and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth, and Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite,

and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty, and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite,

Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,

Elkanah, and Isshiah, and Azarel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites,

and Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

Of the Gadites there separated themselves to David to the stronghold in the wilderness, mighty men of valor, men trained for war, that could handle shield and spear; whose faces were like the faces of lions, and they were as swift as the roes on the mountains;

Ezer the chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,

Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,

Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,

Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,

Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.

These of the sons of Gad were captains of the host: he who was least was equal to one hundred, and the greatest to one thousand.

These are those who went over the Jordan in the first month, when it had overflowed all its banks; and they put to flight all them of the valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

There came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold to David.

David went out to meet them, and answered them, If you be come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit to you; but if [you be come] to betray me to my adversaries, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it.

Then the Spirit came on Amasai, who was chief of the thirty, [and he said], Your are we, David, and on your side, you son of Jesse: peace, peace be to you, and peace be to your helpers; for your God helps you. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band.

Of Manasseh also there fell away some to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle: but they didn’t help them; for the lords of the Philistines on advise sent him away, saying, He will fall away to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillethai, captains of thousands who were of Manasseh.

They helped David against the band of rovers: for they were all mighty men of valor, and were captains in the host.

For from day to day men came to David to help him, until there was a great host, like the host of God.

These are the numbers of the heads of those who were armed for war, who came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of Yahweh.

The children of Judah who bore shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, armed for war.

Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valor for the war, seven thousand and one hundred.

Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred.

Jehoiada was the leader of [the house of] Aaron; and with him were three thousand and seven hundred,

and Zadok, a young man mighty of valor, and of his father’s house twenty-two captains.

Of the children of Benjamin, the brothers of Saul, three thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul.

Of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand eight hundred, mighty men of valor, famous men in their fathers’ houses.

Of the half-tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, who were mentioned by name, to come and make David king.

Of the children of Issachar, men who had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred; and all their brothers were at their commandment.

Of Zebulun, such as were able to go out in the host, who could set the battle in array, with all manner of instruments of war, fifty thousand, and who could order [the battle array, and were] not of double heart.

Of Naphtali one thousand captains, and with them with shield and spear thirty-seven thousand.

Of the Danites who could set the battle in array, twenty-eight thousand six hundred.

Of Asher, such as were able to go out in the host, who could set the battle in array, forty thousand.

On the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, one hundred twenty thousand.

All these being men of war, who could order the battle array, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.

They were there with David three days, eating and drinking; for their brothers had made preparation for them.

Moreover those who were near to them, [even] as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on donkeys, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, victuals of meal, cakes of figs, and clusters of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep in abundance: for there was joy in Israel.

David consulted with the captains of thousands and of hundreds, even with every leader.

David said to all the assembly of Israel, If it seem good to you, and if it be of Yahweh our God, let us send abroad everywhere to our brothers who are left in all the land of Israel, with whom the priests and Levites are in their cities that have suburbs, that they may gather themselves to us;

and let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we didn’t seek it in the days of Saul.

All the assembly said that they would do so; for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.

So David assembled all Israel together, from the Shihor [the brook] of Egypt even to the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim.

David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, [that is], to Kiriath Jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God Yahweh that sits [above] the cherubim, that is called by the Name.

They carried the ark of God on a new cart, [and brought it] out of the house of Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drove the cart.

David and all Israel played before God with all their might, even with songs, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with tambourines, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.

When they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

The anger of Yahweh was kindled against Uzza, and he struck him, because he put forth his hand to the ark; and there he died before God.

David was displeased, because Yahweh had broken forth on Uzza; and he called that place Perez Uzza, to this day.

David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?

So David didn’t move the ark to him into the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.

The ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months: and Yahweh blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that he had.

Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and masons, and carpenters, to build him a house.

David perceived that Yahweh had established him king over Israel; for his kingdom was exalted on high, for his people Israel’s sake.

David took more wives at Jerusalem; and David became the father of more sons and daughters.

These are the names of the children whom he had in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,

and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpelet,

and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphelet.

When the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David: and David heard of it, and went out against them.

Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of Rephaim.

David inquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? and will you deliver them into my hand? Yahweh said to him, Go up; for I will deliver them into your hand.

So they came up to Baal Perazim, and David struck them there; and David said, God has broken my enemies by my hand, like the breach of waters. Therefore they called the name of that place Baal Perazim.

They left their gods there; and David gave commandment, and they were burned with fire.

The Philistines yet again made a raid in the valley.

David inquired again of God; and God said to him, You shall not go up after them: turn away from them, and come on them over against the mulberry trees.

It shall be, when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then you shall go out to battle; for God is gone out before you to strike the host of the Philistines.

David did as God commanded him: and they struck the host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer.

The fame of David went out into all lands; and Yahweh brought the fear of him on all nations.

[David] made him houses in the city of David; and he prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.

Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them has Yahweh chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister to him forever.

David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of Yahweh to its place, which he had prepared for it.

David gathered together the sons of Aaron, and the Levites:

of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, and his brothers one hundred twenty;

of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief, and his brothers two hundred twenty;

of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, and his brothers one hundred thirty;

of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, and his brothers two hundred;

of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, and his brothers eighty;

of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, and his brothers one hundred twelve.

David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab,

and said to them, You are the heads of the fathers’ [houses] of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both you and your brothers, that you may bring up the ark of Yahweh, the God of Israel, to [the place] that I have prepared for it.

For because you didn’t carry it at the first, Yahweh our God made a breach on us, because we didn’t seek him according to the ordinance.

So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of Yahweh, the God of Israel.

The children of the Levites bore the ark of God on their shoulders with the poles thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of Yahweh.

David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brothers the singers, with instruments of music, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up the voice with joy.

So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brothers, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brothers, Ethan the son of Kushaiah;

and with them their brothers of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers.

So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, [were appointed] with cymbals of brass to sound aloud;

and Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries set to Alamoth;

and Mattithiah, and Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps tuned to the eight-stringed lyre, to lead.

Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the song: he instructed about the song, because he was skillful.

Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.

Shebaniah, and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow the trumpets before the ark of God: and Obed-edom and Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark.

So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of Yahweh out of the house of Obed-edom with joy.

It happened, when God helped the Levites who bore the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, that they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams.

David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites who bore the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song [with] the singers: and David had on him an ephod of linen.

Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of Yahweh with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding aloud with psalteries and harps.

It happened, as the ark of the covenant of Yahweh came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David dancing and playing; and she despised him in her heart.

They brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt offerings and peace-offerings before God.

When David had made an end of offering the burnt offering and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Yahweh.

He dealt to everyone of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a portion [of flesh], and a cake of raisins.

He appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of Yahweh, and to celebrate and to thank and praise Yahweh, the God of Israel:

Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps; and Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud;

and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God.

Then on that day David first ordained to give thanks to Yahweh, by the hand of Asaph and his brothers.

Oh give thanks to Yahweh, call on his name; Make known his doings among the peoples.

Sing to him, sing praises to him; Talk you of all his marvelous works.

Glory you in his holy name; Let the heart of them rejoice who seek Yahweh.

Seek you Yahweh and his strength; Seek his face forever more.

Remember his marvelous works that he has done, His wonders, and the judgments of his mouth,

You seed of Israel his servant, You children of Jacob, his chosen ones.

He is Yahweh our God; His judgments are in all the earth.

Remember his covenant forever, The word which he commanded to a thousand generations,

[The covenant] which he made with Abraham, His oath to Isaac,

Confirmed the same to Jacob for a statute, To Israel for an everlasting covenant,

Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, The lot of your inheritance;

When you were but a few men in number, Yes, very few, and sojourners in it;

They went about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people.

He allowed no man to do them wrong; Yes, he reproved kings for their sakes,

[Saying], Don’t touch my anointed ones, Do my prophets no harm.

Sing to Yahweh, all the earth; Show forth his salvation from day to day.

Declare his glory among the nations, His marvelous works among all the peoples.

For great is Yahweh, and greatly to be praised: He also is to be feared above all gods.

For all the gods of the peoples are idols: But Yahweh made the heavens.

Honor and majesty are before him: Strength and gladness are in his place.

Ascribe to Yahweh, you relatives of the peoples, Ascribe to Yahweh glory and strength;

Ascribe to Yahweh the glory due to his name: Bring an offering, and come before him: Worship Yahweh in holy array.

Tremble before him, all the earth: The world also is established that it can’t be moved.

Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice; Let them say among the nations, Yahweh reigns.

Let the sea roar, and the fullness of it; Let the field exult, and all that is therein;

Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before Yahweh; For he comes to judge the earth.

Oh give thanks to Yahweh; for he is good; For his lovingkindness endures forever.

Say you, Save us, God of our salvation, Gather us together and deliver us from the nations, To give thanks to your holy name, To triumph in your praise.

Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, From everlasting even to everlasting. All the people said, Amen, and praised Yahweh.

So he left there, before the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, Asaph and his brothers, to minister before the ark continually, as every day’s work required;

and Obed-edom with their brothers, sixty-eight; Obed-edom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be doorkeepers;

and Zadok the priest, and his brothers the priests, before the tent of Yahweh in the high place that was at Gibeon,

to offer burnt offerings to Yahweh on the altar of burnt offering continually morning and evening, even according to all that is written in the law of Yahweh, which he commanded to Israel;

and with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest who were chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to Yahweh, because his lovingkindness endures forever;

and with them Heman and Jeduthun [with] trumpets and cymbals for those that should sound aloud, and [with] instruments for the songs of God; and the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate.

All the people departed every man to his house: and David returned to bless his house.

It happened, when David lived in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Behold, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of Yahweh [dwells] under curtains.

Nathan said to David, Do all that is in your heart; for God is with you.

It happened the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying,

Go and tell David my servant, Thus says Yahweh, You shall not build me a house to dwell in:

for I have not lived in a house since the day that I brought up Israel, to this day, but have gone from tent to tent, and from [one] tent [to another].

In all places in which I have walked with all Israel, spoke I a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people, saying, Why have you not built me a house of cedar?

Now therefore thus shall you tell my servant David, Thus says Yahweh of Hosts, I took you from the sheep pen, from following the sheep, that you should be prince over my people Israel:

and I have been with you wherever you have gone, and have cut off all your enemies from before you; and I will make you a name, like the name of the great ones who are in the earth.

I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be moved no more; neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at the first,

and [as] from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel; and I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover I tell you that Yahweh will build you a house.

It shall happen, when your days are fulfilled that you must go to be with your fathers, that I will set up your seed after you, who shall be of your sons; and I will establish his kingdom.

He shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne forever.

I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and I will not take my lovingkindness away from him, as I took it from him that was before you;

but I will settle him in my house and in my kingdom forever; and his throne shall be established forever.

According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak to David.

Then David the king went in, and sat before Yahweh; and he said, Who am I, Yahweh God, and what is my house, that you have brought me thus far?

This was a small thing in your eyes, God; but you have spoken of your servant’s house for a great while to come, and have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, Yahweh God.

What can David [say] yet more to you concerning the honor which is done to your servant? for you know your servant.

Yahweh, for your servant’s sake, and according to your own heart, have you worked all this greatness, to make known all [these] great things.

Yahweh, there is none like you, neither is there any God besides you, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

What one nation in the earth is like your people Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a people, to make you a name by great and awesome things, in driving out nations from before your people, whom you redeem out of Egypt?

For your people Israel did you make your own people forever; and you, Yahweh, became their God.

Now, Yahweh, let the word that you have spoken concerning your servant, and concerning his house, be established forever, and do as you have spoken.

Let your name be established and magnified forever, saying, Yahweh of Hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel: and the house of David your servant is established before you.

For you, my God, have revealed to your servant that you will build him a house: therefore has your servant found [in his heart] to pray before you.

Now, Yahweh, you are God, and have promised this good thing to your servant:

and now it has pleased you to bless the house of your servant, that it may continue forever before you: for you, Yahweh, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.

After this it happened, that David struck the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.

He struck Moab; and the Moabites became servants to David, and brought tribute.

David struck Hadarezer king of Zobah to Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion by the river Euphrates.

David took from him one thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for one hundred chariots.

When the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, David struck of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.

Then David put [garrisons] in Syria of Damascus; and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought tribute. Yahweh gave victory to David wherever he went.

David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

From Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadarezer, David took very much brass, with which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.

When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had struck all the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah,

he sent Hadoram his son to king David, to Greet him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadarezer and struck him; (for Hadarezer had wars with Tou;) and [he had with him] all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.

These also did king David dedicate to Yahweh, with the silver and the gold that he carried away from all the nations; from Edom, and from Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek.

Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah struck of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt eighteen thousand.

He put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became servants to David. Yahweh gave victory to David wherever he went.

David reigned over all Israel; and he executed justice and righteousness to all his people.

Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;

and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Shavsha was scribe;

and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief about the king.

It happened after this, that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his place.

David said, I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father shown kindness to me. So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. David’s servants came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.

But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Think you that David does honor your father, in that he has sent comforters to you? Aren’t his servants come to you to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?

So Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.

Then there went certain persons, and told David how the men were served. He sent to meet them; for the men were greatly ashamed. The king said, Stay at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.

When the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent one thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Arammaacah, and out of Zobah.

So they hired them thirty-two thousand chariots, and the king of Maacah and his people, who came and encamped before Medeba. The children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to battle.

When David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.

The children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the gate of the city: and the kings who had come were by themselves in the field.

Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians.

The rest of the people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother; and they put themselves in array against the children of Ammon.

He said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then you shall help me; but if the children of Ammon be too strong for you, then I will help you.

Be of good courage, and let us play the man for our people, and for the cities of our God: and Yahweh do that which seems him good.

So Joab and the people who were with him drew near before the Syrians to the battle; and they fled before him.

When the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.

When the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians who were beyond the River, with Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer at their head.

It was told David; and he gathered all Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came on them, and set the battle in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with him.

The Syrians fled before Israel; and David killed of the Syrians [the men of] seven thousand chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host.

When the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and served him: neither would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any more.

It happened, at the time of the return of the year, at the time when kings go out [to battle], that Joab led forth the army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David stayed at Jerusalem. Joab struck Rabbah, and overthrew it.

David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and it was set on David’s head: and he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceeding much.

He brought forth the people who were therein, and cut [them] with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. Thus did David to all the cities of the children of Ammon. David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.

It happened after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines: then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, of the sons of the giant; and they were subdued.

There was again war with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.

There was again war at Gath, where was a man of great stature, whose fingers and toes were twenty-four, six [on each hand], and six [on each foot]; and he also was born to the giant.

When he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David’s brother killed him.

These were born to the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.

Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel.

David said to Joab and to the princes of the people, Go, number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring me word, that I may know the sum of them.

Joab said, Yahweh make his people a hundred times as many as they are: but, my lord the king, aren’t they all my lord’s servants? why does my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of guilt to Israel?

Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against Joab. Therefore Joab departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.

Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of the people to David. All those of Israel were one million one hundred thousand men who drew sword: and in Judah were four hundred seventy thousand men who drew sword.

But he didn’t count Levi and Benjamin among them; for the king’s word was abominable to Joab.

God was displeased with this thing; therefore he struck Israel.

David said to God, I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing: but now, put away, I beg you, the iniquity of your servant; for I have done very foolishly.

Yahweh spoke to Gad, David’s seer, saying,

Go and speak to David, saying, Thus says Yahweh, I offer you three things: choose you one of them, that I may do it to you.

So Gad came to David, and said to him, Thus says Yahweh, Take which you will:

either three years of famine; or three months to be consumed before your foes, while the sword of your enemies overtakes you; or else three days the sword of Yahweh, even pestilence in the land, and the angel of Yahweh destroying throughout all the borders of Israel. Now therefore consider what answer I shall return to him who sent me.

David said to Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall, I pray, into the hand of Yahweh; for very great are his mercies: and let me not fall into the hand of man.

So Yahweh sent a pestilence on Israel; and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.

God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was about to destroy, Yahweh saw, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the destroying angel, It is enough; now stay your hand. The angel of Yahweh was standing by the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of Yahweh standing between earth and the sky, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell on their faces.

David said to God, Isn’t it I who commanded the people to be numbered? It is even I who have sinned and done very wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? Please let your hand, O Yahweh my God, be against me, and against my father’s house; but not against your people, that they should be plagued.

Then the angel of Yahweh commanded Gad to tell David, that David should go up, and raise an altar to Yahweh in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spoke in the name of Yahweh.

Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons who were with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.

As David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshing floor, and bowed himself to David with his face to the ground.

Then David said to Ornan, Give me the place of this threshing floor, that I may build thereon an altar to Yahweh: for the full price shall you give it me, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

Ornan said to David, Take it to you, and let my lord the king do that which is good in his eyes: behold, I give [you] the oxen for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat for the meal-offering; I give it all.

King David said to Ornan, No; but I will most assuredly buy it for the full price: for I will not take that which is your for Yahweh, nor offer a burnt-offering without cost.

So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.

David built there an altar to Yahweh, and offered burnt offerings and peace-offerings, and called on Yahweh; and he answered him from the sky by fire on the altar of burnt offering.

Yahweh commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again into the sheath of it.

At that time, when David saw that Yahweh had answered him in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

For the tent of Yahweh, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.

But David couldn’t go before it to inquire of God; for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of Yahweh.

Then David said, This is the house of Yahweh God, and this is the altar of burnt-offering for Israel.

David commanded to gather together the sojourners who were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew worked stones to build the house of God.

David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the couplings; and brass in abundance without weight;

and cedar trees without number: for the Sidonians and they of Tyre brought cedar trees in abundance to David.

David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be built for Yahweh must be exceeding magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will therefore make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.

Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build a house for Yahweh, the God of Israel.

David said to Solomon his son, As for me, it was in my heart to build a house to the name of Yahweh my God.

But the word of Yahweh came to me, saying, You have shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars: you shall not build a house to my name, because you have shed much blood on the earth in my sight.

Behold, a son shall be born to you, who shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days:

he shall build a house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever.

Now, my son, Yahweh be with you; and prosper you, and build the house of Yahweh your God, as he has spoken concerning you.

Only Yahweh give you discretion and understanding, and give you charge concerning Israel; that so you may keep the law of Yahweh your God.

Then shall you prosper, if you observe to do the statutes and the ordinances which Yahweh charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong, and of good courage; don’t be afraid, neither be dismayed.

Now, behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Yahweh one hundred thousand talents of gold, and one thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and you may add thereto.

Moreover there are workmen with you in abundance, cutters and workers of stone and timber, and all men who are skillful in every manner of work:

of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no number. Arise and be doing, and Yahweh be with you.

David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, [saying],

Isn’t Yahweh your God with you? and hasn’t he given you rest on every side? for he has delivered the inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before Yahweh, and before his people.

Now set your heart and your soul to seek after Yahweh your God; arise therefore, and build you the sanctuary of Yahweh God, to bring the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of Yahweh.

Now David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel.

He gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.

The Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand.

Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee the work of the house of Yahweh; and six thousand were officers and judges;

and four thousand were doorkeepers; and four thousand praised Yahweh with the instruments which I made, [said David], to praise therewith.

David divided them into courses according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

Of the Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei.

The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, and Zetham, and Joel, three.

The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers’ [houses] of Ladan.

The sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.

Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and Beriah didn’t have many sons; therefore they became a fathers’ house in one reckoning.

The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.

The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons, forever, to burn incense before Yahweh, to minister to him, and to bless in his name, forever.

But as for Moses the man of God, his sons were named among the tribe of Levi.

The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.

The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the chief.

The sons of Eliezer were: Rehabiah the chief; and Eliezer had no other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.

The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the chief.

The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.

The sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah the second.

The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.

Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters only: and their brothers the sons of Kish took them [to wife].

The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.

These were the sons of Levi after their fathers’ houses, even the heads of the fathers’ [houses] of those of those who were counted, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work for the service of the house of Yahweh, from twenty years old and upward.

For David said, Yahweh, the God of Israel, has given rest to his people; and he dwells in Jerusalem forever:

and also the Levites shall no more have need to carry the tent and all the vessels of it for the service of it.

For by the last words of David the sons of Levi were numbered, from twenty years old and upward.

For their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Yahweh, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things, even the work of the service of the house of God;

for the show bread also, and for the fine flour for a meal-offering, whether of unleavened wafers, or of that which is baked in the pan, or of that which is soaked, and for all manner of measure and size;

and to stand every morning to thank and praise Yahweh, and likewise at even;

and to offer all burnt offerings to Yahweh, on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and on the set feasts, in number according to the ordinance concerning them, continually before Yahweh;

and that they should keep the charge of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brothers, for the service of the house of Yahweh.

The courses of the sons of Aaron [were these]. The sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest’s office.

David with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their ordering in their service.

There were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar; and [thus] were they divided: of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen, heads of fathers’ houses; and of the sons of Ithamar, according to their fathers’ houses, eight.

Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for there were princes of the sanctuary, and princes of God, both of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.

Shemaiah the son of Nethanel the scribe, who was of the Levites, wrote them in the presence of the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the heads of the fathers’ [houses] of the priests and of the Levites; one fathers’ house being taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.

Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,

the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,

the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,

the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,

the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,

the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,

the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,

the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,

the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,

the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,

the one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,

the three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to Maaziah.

This was the ordering of them in their service, to come into the house of Yahweh according to the ordinance [given] to them by Aaron their father, as Yahweh, the God of Israel, had commanded him.

Of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.

Of Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.

Of the Izharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.

The sons [of Hebron]: Jeriah [the chief], Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.

The sons of Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir.

The brother of Micah, Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.

The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah: Beno.

The sons of Merari: of Jaaziah, Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.

Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.

Of Kish; the sons of Kish: Jerahmeel.

The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after their fathers’ houses.

These likewise cast lots even as their brothers the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the heads of the fathers’ [houses] of the priests and of the Levites; the fathers’ [houses] of the chief even as those of his younger brother.

Moreover David and the captains of the host set apart for the service certain of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of those who did the work according to their service was:

of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asharelah, the sons of Asaph, under the hand of Asaph, who prophesied after the order of the king.

Of Jeduthun; the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun with the harp, who prophesied in giving thanks and praising Yahweh.

Of Heman; the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth.

All these were the sons of Heman the king’s seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn. God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.

All these were under the hands of their father for song in the house of Yahweh, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God; Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman being under the order of the king.

The number of them, with their brothers who were instructed in singing to Yahweh, even all who were skillful, was two hundred eighty-eight.

They cast lots for their offices, all alike, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar.

Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah; he and his brothers and sons were twelve:

the third to Zaccur, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the tenth to Shimei, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the thirteenth, Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the one and twentieth to Hothir, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the two and twentieth to Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the three and twentieth to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve:

for the four and twentieth to Romamtiezer, his sons and his brothers, twelve.

For the courses of the doorkeepers: of the Korahites, Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.

Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,

Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.

Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethanel the fifth,

Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth; for God blessed him.

Also to Shemaiah his son were sons born, who ruled over the house of their father; for they were mighty men of valor.

The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brothers were valiant men, Elihu, and Semachiah.

All these were of the sons of Obed-edom: they and their sons and their brothers, able men in strength for the service; sixty-two of Obed-edom.

Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, valiant men, eighteen.

Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him chief),

Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brothers of Hosah were thirteen.

Of these were the courses of the doorkeepers, even of the chief men, having offices like their brothers, to minister in the house of Yahweh.

They cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to their fathers’ houses, for every gate.

The lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a discreet counselor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.

To Obed-edom southward; and to his sons the store-house.

To Shuppim and Hosah westward, by the gate of Shallecheth, at the causeway that goes up, watch against watch.

Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, and for the store-house two and two.

For Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at Parbar.

These were the courses of the doorkeepers; of the sons of the Korahites, and of the sons of Merari.

Of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.

The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the heads of the fathers’ [houses] belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: Jehieli.

The sons of Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, over the treasures of the house of Yahweh.

Of the Amramites, of the Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the Uzzielites:

and Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler over the treasures.

His brothers: of Eliezer [came] Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomoth his son.

This Shelomoth and his brothers were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the heads of the fathers’ [houses], the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated.

Out of the spoil won in battles did they dedicate to repair the house of Yahweh.

All that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated, whoever had dedicated anything, it was under the hand of Shelomoth, and of his brothers.

Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges.

Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, men of valor, one thousand seven hundred, had the oversight of Israel beyond the Jordan westward, for all the business of Yahweh, and for the service of the king.

Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even of the Hebronites, according to their generations by fathers’ [houses]. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valor at Jazer of Gilead.

His brothers, men of valor, were two thousand and seven hundred, heads of fathers’ [houses], whom king David made overseers over the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of the Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God, and for the affairs of the king.

Now the children of Israel after their number, [to wit], the heads of fathers’ [houses] and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers who served the king, in any matter of the courses which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year-of every course were twenty-four thousand.

Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

[He was] of the children of Perez, the chief of all the captains of the host for the first month.

Over the course of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his course; and Mikloth the ruler: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the priest, chief: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

This is that Benaiah, who was the mighty man of the thirty, and over the thirty: and [of] his course was Ammizabad his son.

The fourth [captain] for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The fifth captain for this fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The sixth [captain] for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The seventh [captain] for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The eighth [captain] for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The ninth [captain] for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

The tenth [captain] for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites: and in his course were Twenty-four thousand.

The eleventh [captain] for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were Twenty-four thousand.

The twelfth [captain] for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty-four thousand.

Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri the ruler: of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah:

of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel: of Aaron, Zadok:

of Judah, Elihu, one of the brothers of David: of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael:

of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jeremoth the son of Azriel:

of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah:

of the half -[tribe] of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner:

of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.

But David didn’t take the number of them from twenty years old and under, because Yahweh had said he would increase Israel like the stars of the sky.

Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but didn’t finish; and there came wrath for this on Israel; neither was the number put into the account in the chronicles of king David.

Over the king’s treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and over the treasures in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the castles, was Jonathan the son of Uzziah:

Over those who did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub:

and over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: and over the increase of the vineyards for the wine-cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite:

and over the olive trees and the sycamore trees that were in the lowland was Baal Hanan the Gederite: and over the cellars of oil was Joash:

and over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai:

and over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the donkeys was Jehdeiah the Meronothite: and over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite.

All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David’s.

Also Jonathan, David’s uncle, was a counselor, a man of understanding, and a scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king’s sons:

Ahithophel was the king’s counselor: and Hushai the Archite was the king’s friend:

and after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the captain of the king’s host was Joab.

David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies who served the king by course, and the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and the rulers over all the substance and possessions of the king and of his sons, with the officers, and the mighty men, even all the mighty men of valor, to Jerusalem.

Then David the king stood up on his feet, and said, Hear me, my brothers, and my people: as for me, it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, and for the footstool of our God; and I had made ready for the building.

But God said to me, You shall not build a house for my name, because you are a man of war, and have shed blood.

However Yahweh, the God of Israel, chose me out of all the house of my father to be king over Israel forever: for he has chosen Judah to be prince; and in the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel;

Of all my sons (for Yahweh has given me many sons), he has chosen Solomon my son to sit on the throne of the kingdom of Yahweh over Israel.

He said to me, Solomon your son, he shall build my house and my courts; for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.

I will establish his kingdom forever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my ordinances, as at this day.

Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of Yahweh, and in the audience of our God, observe and seek out all the commandments of Yahweh your God; that you may possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children after you forever.

You, Solomon my son, know you the God of your father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for Yahweh searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if you seek him, he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will cast you off forever.

Take heed now; for Yahweh has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch [of the temple], and of the houses of it, and of the treasuries of it, and of the upper rooms of it, and of the inner chambers of it, and of the place of the mercy seat;

and the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, for the courts of the house of Yahweh, and for all the chambers round about, for the treasuries of the house of God, and for the treasuries of the dedicated things;

also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of Yahweh, and for all the vessels of service in the house of Yahweh;

of gold by weight for the [vessels of] gold, for all vessels of every kind of service; [of silver] for all the vessels of silver by weight, for all vessels of every kind of service;

by weight also for the lampstands of gold, and for the lamps of it, of gold, by weight for every lampstand and for the lamps of it; and for the lampstands of silver, [silver] by weight for [every] lampstand and for the lamps of it, according to the use of every lampstand;

and the gold by weight for the tables of show bread, for every table; and silver for the tables of silver;

and the flesh-hooks, and the basins, and the cups, of pure gold; and for the golden bowls by weight for every bowl; and for the silver bowls by weight for every bowl;

and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the chariot, [even] the cherubim, that spread out [their wings], and covered the ark of the covenant of Yahweh.

All this, [said David], have I been made to understand in writing from the hand of Yahweh, even all the works of this pattern.

David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage, and do it: don’t be afraid, nor be dismayed; for Yahweh God, even my God, is with you; he will not fail you, nor forsake you, until all the work for the service of the house of Yahweh is finished.

Behold, there are the courses of the priests and the Levites, for all the service of the house of God: and there shall be with you in all manner of work every willing man who has skill, for any manner of service: also the captains and all the people will be wholly at your commandment.

David the king said to all the assembly, Solomon my son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is great; for the palace is not for man, but for Yahweh God.

Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for the [things of] gold, and the silver for the [things of] silver, and the brass for the [things of] brass, the iron for the [things of] iron, and wood for the [things of] wood; onyx stones, and [stones] to be set, stones for inlaid work, and of various colors, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance.

Moreover also, because I have set my affection on the house of my God, seeing that I have a treasure of my own of gold and silver, I give it to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,

even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, with which to overlay the walls of the houses;

of gold for the [things of] gold, and of silver for the [things of] silver, and for all manner of work [to be made] by the hands of artificers. Who then offers willingly to consecrate himself this day to Yahweh?

Then the princes of the fathers’ [houses], and the princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers over the king’s work, offered willingly;

and they gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand darics, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thousand talents, and of iron a hundred thousand talents.

They with whom [precious] stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of Yahweh, under the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.

Then the people rejoiced, because they offered willingly, because with a perfect heart they offered willingly to Yahweh: and David the king also rejoiced with great joy.

Therefore David blessed Yahweh before all the assembly; and David said, Blessed be you, Yahweh, the God of Israel our father, forever and ever.

Yours, Yahweh, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heavens and in the earth [is your]; your is the kingdom, Yahweh, and you are exalted as head above all.

Both riches and honor come of you, and you rule over all; and in your hand is power and might; and in your hand it is to make great, and to give strength to all.

Now therefore, our God, we thank you, and praise your glorious name.

But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of you, and of your own have we given you.

For we are strangers before you, and sojourners, as all our fathers were: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding.

Yahweh our God, all this store that we have prepared to build you a house for your holy name comes of your hand, and is all your own.

I know also, my God, that you try the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy your people, that are present here, offer willingly to you.

Yahweh, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this forever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of your people, and prepare their heart to you;

and give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep your commandments, your testimonies, and your statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for which I have made provision.

David said to all the assembly, Now bless Yahweh your God. All the assembly blessed Yahweh, the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshiped Yahweh, and the king.

They sacrificed sacrifices to Yahweh, and offered burnt offerings to Yahweh, on the next day after that day, even one thousand bulls, one thousand rams, and one thousand lambs, with their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel,

and ate and drink before Yahweh on that day with great gladness. They made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him to Yahweh to be prince, and Zadok to be priest.

Then Solomon sat on the throne of Yahweh as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.

All the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves to Solomon the king.

Yahweh magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed on him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.

Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.

The time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty-three [years] reigned he in Jerusalem.

He died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honor: and Solomon his son reigned in his place.

Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Samuel the seer, and in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the history of Gad the seer,

with all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries.