TIMON 
Ho, Zeus, you Protector of Friends and Guests and
Comrades, Keeper of the Hearth, Lord of the
Lightning, Guardian of Oaths, Cloud-Compeller,
Loud-thunderer and whatever else crazy poets call
you, above all when they are in trouble with their
verses, for then to help them out you assume a
multitude of names and so shore up the weak spots in
their metre and fill up the gaps in their rhythm!
Where now is your pealing levin, your rolling thunder
and your blazing, flashing, horrid bolt? All that
has turned out to be stuff and nonsense, pure poetic
vapour except for the resonance of the names.
That famous, far-flying, ready weapon of yours has
been completely quenched in some way or other
and is cold, not even retaining a tiny spark of
resentment against wrong doers.

Indeed, anyone
who should undertake to commit perjury would be
more afraid of a guttering rushlight than of the
blaze of your all-conquering thunderbolt. What
you menace them with is such a mere firebrand, they
think, that they do not fear flame or smoke from it
and expect the only harm they will get from the
stroke is to be covered with soot.
 
 

That is why even Salmoneus dared to rival your
thunder, and he was far from ineffective at it, for

 

he was a man of fiery deeds flaunting his prowess in
the face of a Zeus so lukewarm in spirit. And why
not, when you lie asleep as if you were drugged
with mandragora? You neither hear perjurers nor
see wrong-doers ; you are short-sighted and purblind
to all that goes on and have grown as hard of hearing
as aman in his dotage.

Yet while you were still
young and quick-tempered and violent in your wrath,
you were very active against sinners and oppressors
and you never made truce with them then. No,
your bolt was always busy at all costs; your aegis
shook, your thunder pealed, and your lightning was
launched out incessantly like skirmish fire. The
earth shook like a sieve, the snow fell in heaps, the
hail was like cobblestones (if I may talk with you
familiarly), and the rain-storms were fierce and
furious, every drop a river ; consequently, such a flood
took place all in a moment in the time of Deucalion
that when everything else had sunk beneath the
waters a single chest barely escaped to land at
Lycoreus, preserving a vital spark of human seed
for the engendering of greater wickedness.

The result is that you are reaping the fruit of
your laziness. Nobody either sacrifices or wears
wreaths in your honour any longer, except now and
then a man who does it as something incidental to
the games at Olympia; and even in that case he
does not think he is doing anything at all necessary,
but just contributes to the support of an ancient
custom. Little by little, most noble of the gods,
they have ousted you from your high esteem and
are turning you into a Cronus. I will not say how
many times they have robbed your temple already ;
some of them, however, have actually laid their

 

hands upon your own person at Olympia, and you,
High-thunderer though you be, were too sluggish to
rouse the dogs or to call in the neighbours that they
might come to your rescue and catch the fellows
while they were still packing up for flight. No,
you noble Giant-killer and Titan-conqueror, you sat
still and let them crop your long locks, holding a
fifteen-foot thunderbolt in your right hand ! 
 
Come, you marvellous ruler, when will you stop
overlooking these things in such a careless way ?
When will you punish all this wrong-doing? How
many conflagrations and deluges will be enough to
cope with such overwhelming insolence in the world ?

For instance, let me put aside generalities and speak
of my own case.



After raising so many Athenians
to high station and making them rich when they
were wretchedly poor before and helping all who
were in want, nay more, pouring out my wealth in
floods to benefit my friends, now that I have become
poor thereby I am no longer recognized or even
looked at by the men who formerly cringed and
kowtowed and hung upon my nod. On the contrary,
if I chance to meet any of them in the road, they
treat me as they would the gravestone of aman long
dead which time has overturned, passing by without even a curious glance..-- Indeed, some of them,
on catching sight of me in the distance, turn off in
another direction, thinking that the man who not
long ago showed himself their saviour and benefactor
will be an unpleasant and repulsive spectacle.

Therefore

 

my wrongs have driven me to this outlying
farm, where, dressed in skins, I till the soil as a
hired labourer at four obols a day, philosophizing
with the solitude and with my pick. By so doing, I
expect to gain at least thus much, that I shall no
longer see a great many people enjoying undeserved
success; for that, certainly, would be more painful.
Come then, son of Cronus and Rhea, shake off at
length that deep, sound sleep, for you have slumbered
longer than Epimenides; fan your thunderbolt
into flame or kindle it afresh from Aetna, and make
a great blaze, evincing anger worthy of a stalwart
and youthful Zeus—unless indeed the tale is true
that the Cretans tell about you and your tomb in
their island.

ZEUS 
Who is that, Hermes, who is shouting from Attica,
near Hymettus, in the foot-hills, all dirty and
squalid and dressed in skins? He is digging, I
think, with his back bent. A mouthy fellow and an
impudent one. Very likely he is a philosopher,
otherwise he would not talk so impiously against
us.
 
 HERMES 
What, father! Don’t you know Timon of Collytus, the son of Echecratides? He is the man who
often treated us to perfect sacrifices; the one who
had just come into a fortune, who gave us the complete hecatombs and used to entertain us brilliantly
at his house during the Diasia.

 

 ZEUS 
Ah, what a reverse! He the fine gentleman, the
rich man, who had all the friends about him? What
has happened to him to make hin like this, poor
man, a dirty fellow digging ditches and working for
wages, it seems, with such a heavy pick to swing?

HERMES 
Well, you might say that he was ruined by
kind-heartedness and philanthropy and compassion
on all those who were in want; but in reality it was
senselessness and folly and lack of discrimination in
regard to his friends. He did not perceive that he
was showing kindness to ravens and wolves, and
while so many birds of prey were tearing his liver,
the unhappy man thought they were his friends and
sworn brothers, who enjoyed their rations only on
account of the good-will they bore him. But when
they had thoroughly stripped his bones and gnawed
them clean, and had very carefully sucked out whatever marrow there was in them, they went away and
left him like a dry tree with severed roots, no longer
recognizing him or looking at him—why should they,
pray ?—or giving him help or making him presents in
their turn. So, leaving the city out of shame, he has
taken to the pick and the coat of skin, as you see,
and tills the soil for hire, brooding” crazily over his
wrongs because the men whom he enriched pass him
by very disdainfully without even knowing whether
his name is Timon or not.

ZEUS 
Come now, we must not overlook the man or neglect him, for he had reason to be angry in view of his
wretched plight. Why, we should be like those vile

 

toadies of his if we left a man forgotten who has
burned so many fat thigh-bones of bulls and goats on
the altar to honour us; indeed, I have the steam of
them still in my nostrils! However, business has
been so heavy, the perjurers and oppressors and
plunderers have made such a hubbub, and I have
been so afraid of the temple-robbers, who are numerous and hard to guard against and do not let me
close my eyes for an.instant, that I haven't even
looked at Attica for a long time, particularly
since philosophy and debates grew rife among the
Athenians, for it is impossible even to hear the
prayers on account of their wrangling and shouting ;
one must therefore either sit with his ears stopped
or be dinned to death with their harangues about
“virtue” and “things incorporeal”’ and other piffle.
That is how I happened to neglect this man, who is
not a bad sort.

However, take Riches, Hermes, and go to him
quickly ; let Riches take Treasure along too, and let
them both stay with Timon and not be so ready to
go away, however much he may try to chase them
out of the house again in the kindness of his heart.
About those toadies and the thanklessness which they
showed toward him I shall take measures later, and
they shall be punished as soon as I get my thunderbolt put in order; for the two longest tines of it
are broken and blunted since yesterday, when I let
drive a little too vigorously at the sophist Anaxagoras,
who was teaching his disciples that we gods do not
count at all. I missed him, for Pericles held his

 

hand over him, and the bolt, glancing off into the
Anaceum, set the temple afire and itself came near
being broken to bits on the rock. But in the meantime it will be punishment enough for them if they
see Timon enormously rich.

HERMES 
What an advantageous thing it is to shout loudly
and to be annoying and impudent! It is useful not
only to pleaders in court but to petitioners to Heaven.
Lo and behold, Timon, who is now wretchedly poor,
will become rich in an instant because he prayed
vociferously and outspokenly and drew the attention
of Zeus; but if he had bent his back and dug in
silence he would still be digging neglected.
 
 RICHES 
But I really can’t go to him, Zeus.
 
 ZEUS 
Why not, my good Riches, when I have bidden
you to do so?

RICHES 
Why, by Zeus, because he treated me contumeliously, bundled me out, made ducks and drakes of
me, although I was his father’s friend, and all
but thrust me out of the house with a pitchfork,
throwing me away as people throw hot coals out of
their hands. Am I to go back, then, and be betrayed into the hands of parasites and toadies and
prostitutes ?. Send me to men who will be pleased
with the gift, Zeus, who will be attentive to me, who
hold me in honour and yearn for me, and let these

 

noddies abide with Poverty, whom they prefer to
me; let them get a coat of skin and a pick from her
and be content, poor wretches, with a wage of four
obols, they who heedlessly fling away ten-talent
gifts.

ZEUS 
Timon will never again treat you in any such way,
for unless the small of his back is completely insensible, his pick has certainly taught him that he
should have preferred you to Poverty. It seems to me,
however, that you are very fault-finding. Now you
are blaming Timon because he flung his doors open for
you and let you go abroad freely, neither locking you
in nor displaying jealousy ; but at other times it was
quite the reverse’; you used to get angry at the rich
and say that they locked you up with bolts and keys
and seals to such an extent that you could not put
your head out into the light of day. At all events
that was the lament you used to make to me, saying
that you were being stifled in deep darkness. That
was why you presented yourself to us pallid and full
of worries, with your fingers deformed from the habit
of counting on them, and threatened that if you got
a chance you would run away. In short, you thought
it a terrible thing to lead a virginal life like Danae
in a chamber of bronze or iron, and to be brought
up under the care of those precise and unscrupulous
guardians, Interest and Accounts.

As a matter of
fact, you used to say that they acted absurdly in that
they loved you to excess, yet did not dare to enjoy
‘you when they might, and instead of giving free
rein to their passion when it lay in their power to do
so, they kept watch and ward, looking fixedly at the
seal and the bolt; for they thought it enjoyment

 

enough, not that they were able to enjoy you
themselves, but that they were shutting out everyone else from a share in the enjoyment, like the dog
in the manger that neither ate the barley herself nor
permitted the hungry horse to eat it. Moreover,
you laughed them to scorn because they scrimped
and saved and, what is strangest of all, were jealous
of themselves, all unaware that a cursed valet or a
shackle-burnishing steward would slip in by stealth
and play havoc, leaving his luckless, unloved master
to sit up over his interests beside a dim, narrownecked lamp with a thirsty wick. Why, then, is it
not unjust in you, after having found fault with that
sort of thing in the past, to charge Timon with the
opposite now ?

RICHES 
Really, if you look into the truth, you will think
that I do both with good reason, for Timon’s
extreme laxity may fairly be deemed inconsiderate
and unfriendly toward me; and on the other hand,
when men kept me locked up in dark coffers, taking
pains to get me fat and plump and overgrown, and
neither laid a finger on me themselves nor brought
me out into the light of day for fear that I might be
seen by someone else, I used to consider them
senseless and arrogant because they let me grow
soft in such durance when I had done no wrong,
and were unaware that after a little they would go
away and leave me to some other favourite of fortune.

I have no praise, therefore, either for these men or
for those who are very free with me, but only for
those who will do what is best and observe modera-

 

tion in the thing, neither holding hands off altogether
nor throwing me away outright.
Look at it in this way, Zeus, in the name of Zeus.
If a man should take a young and beautiful woman
for his lawful wife and then should not keep watch
of her or display jealousy at all, but should let her
go wherever she would by night and by day and
have to do with anyone who wished, nay more,
should himself induce her to commit adultery,
opening his doors and playing the go-between and
inviting everybody in to her, would such a man appear to love her?



You at least, Zeus, who have
often been in love, would not say so!

On the other
hand, suppose a man should take a woman of gentle
birth into his house in due form for the procreation of
children, and then should neither lay a finger on the
ripe and beautiful maiden himself nor suffer anyone
else to look at her, but should lock her up and keep
her a maid, childless and sterile, asserting, however,
that he loved her and making it plain that he did so by
his colour and wasted flesh and sunken eyes. Would
not such a man appear to be out of his mind when,
although he ought to have children and get some
good of his marriage, he lets so fair and lovely a girl
fade by keeping her all her life as if she were vowed
to Demeter? That is the sort of thing I myself am
angry about; for some of them kick me about
shamefully and tear my flesh and pour me out like
water, while others keep me in shackles like a runaway slave with a brand on his forehead.

ZEUS 
Then why are you angry at them? Both sorts
pay a fine penalty ; for these last, like Tantalus, go
hungry and thirsty and dry-lipped, merely gaping at

 

their gold, while the others, like Phineus, have their
food snatched out of their mouths by the Harpies.
But be off with you now to Timon, whom you will
find far more discreet.
 
 RICHES 
What, will he ever stop acting as if he were in a
leaky boat and baling me out in haste before I have
entirely flowed in, wanting to get ahead of the
entering stream for fear that I will flood the boat and
swamp him? No, and so I expect to carry water to
the jar of the Danaids and pour it in without result, because the vessel is not tight but all that flows
in will run out almost before it flows in, so much
wider is the vent of the jar and so unhindered is
the escape.

ZEUS 
Well, if he doesn’t intend to stop that vent and it
turns out to have been opened once for all, you will
speedily run out and he will have no trouble in finding his coat of skin and his pick again in the lees of
the jar. But be off now and make him rich; and
when you come back, Hermes, be sure to bring me
the Cyclopes from Actna, so that they may point my
thunderbolt and put it in order, for we shall soon
need it sharp.

HERMES 
Let us be going, Riches. What’s this? You're
limping? I didn’t know that you were lame as well
as blind, my good sir.

 

 RICHES 
It is not always this way, Hermes. When I go to
visit anyone on a mission from Zeus, for some reason
or other I am sluggish and lame in both legs, so that
I have great difficulty in reaching my journey’s end,
and not infrequently the man who is awaiting me
grows old before I arrive. But when I am to go
away, I have wings, you will find, and am far swifter
than a dream. Indeed, no sooner is the signal given
for the start than I am proclaimed the winner,
after covering the course so fast that sometimes the
onlookers do not even catch sight of me.
 
 HERMES 
What you say is not so. I myself could name you
plenty of men who yesterday had not a copper to
buy a rope with, but to-day are suddenly rich and
wealthy, riding out behind a span of white horses
when they never before owned so much as a donkey.
In spite of that, they: go about dressed in purple,
with rings on their fingers, themselves unable to
believe, I fancy, that their wealth is not a dream.

RICHES 
That is a different matter, Hermes; I do not go
on my own feet then, and it is not Zeus but Pluto
who sends me; for he, too, is a bestower of riches
and a generous giver, as his name implies. When I
am to go from one man to another, they put me in
wax tablets, seal me up carefully, take me up and
carry me away. The dead man is laid out in a dark
corner of the house with an old sheet over his knees,
to be fought for by the weasels, while those who
have expectations regarding me wait for me in the
public square with their mouths open, just as the

 

swallow’s chirping brood waits for her to tly home.

When the seal is removed, the thread cut, and the
tablets opened, they announce the naine of my new
master, cither a relative or a toady or a lewd slave
held in high esteem since the days of his wanton
youth, with his chin still shaven clean, who in this
way gets a generous recompense, deserving fellow
that he is, for many and various favours which he did
his master long after he had earned a discharge.
Whoever he may be, he snatches me up, tablets and
all, and runs off with me, changing his name from
Pyrrhias or Dromo or Tibius to Megacles or
Megabyzus or Protarchus, while those others who
opened their mouths in vain are left looking at one
another and mourning in earnest because such a
fine fish has made his escape from the inmost
pocket of their net after swallowing quantities of
bait.

As for the man who has been flung head over
ears into riches, an uncultivated, coarse-grained
fellow who still shudders at the irons, pricks up his
ear if anyone casually flicks a whip in passing, and
worships the mill as if it were the seat of the
mysteries, he is no longer endurable to those who
encounter him, but insults gentlemen and whips his
fellow-slaves, just to see if he himself can do that
sort of thing, until at length he falls in with a prostitute or takes a fancy to breed horses or gives
himself into the keeping of toadies who swear that
he is better looking than Nireus, better born than
Cecrops or Codrus, sharper witted than Odysseus
and richer than sixteen Croesuses in one ; and then
in a moment, poor devil, he pours out all that was

 

accumulated little by little through many perjuries,
robberies and villainies.

HERMES 
Yes, that is just about the way of it. But when
you go on your own feet, how do you find the way,
since you are so blind, and how do you tell who the
people are whom Zeus sends you to because he thinks
they deserve to be rich?
 
 RICHES 
Do you suppose I find the way or tell who they
are? Good Heavens, not a bit of it! Otherwise I
would not have left Aristides in the lurch"to--go to
Hipponicus and Callias and a great many others who
do not deserve a copper. 
 HERMES 
But what do you do when he sends you down ?
 
 RICHES 
I wander up and down, roaming about until I come
upon someone unawares, and that man, whoever he
may be who happens on me, takes me home and
keeps me, paying homage to you, Hermes, for his
unexpected stroke of good-luck.

HERMES 
Then you have cheated Zeus, who thinks that you
observe his decrees and enrich those who in his
opinion deserve riches ?
 
 RICHES 
Yes, and very properly, my friend, for although he


 

knew that I was blind, he kept sending me to search
for a thing so hard to find, which long ago became
eclipsed in the world; even a Lynceus could not find
it easily, so dim and tiny is its light. So, as the
good men are few and wicked men in great numbers
fill the cities, it is easier for me to fall in with then
in my wanderings and to get into their nets.
 
 HERMES 
Then how is it that when you leave them you
escape easily, since you do not know the way ?
 
 RICHES 
For some reason I become sharp of eye and swift
of foot then, but only for the time of ny escape.

HERMES 
Now just answer me this one more question. How
is it that although you are blind (pardon my frankness), and not only that but pale and heavy-footed, you
have lovers in such number that all men regard you
with adimiration and count themselves lucky if they
win you, but cannot bear to live if they fail? In
fact, I know a good many of them who were so
desperately in love with you that they went and
flung themselves “into the deep-bosomed sea” and
“over the beetling crags” 



because they thought
you were cutting them when as a matter of fact you
could not see them at all. But you yourself will
admit, I am sure, if you know yourself, that they
are crazy to lose their heads over such a beloved.

RICHES 
Do you suppose they see me as I am, lame and
blind and with all my other bad points ?


 

 HERMES 
But how can they help it, Riches, unless they
themselves are all blind ?
 
 RICHES 
They are not blind, good friend, but Ignorance
and Deceit, who now hold sway everywhere, darken
their vision. Moreover, to avoid being wholly ugly,
I always put on a very lovely mask, gay with tinscl
and jewels, and an embroidered robe before I meet
them ; whereupon, thinking that they sce my beauty
face to face, they fall in love with me and despair
of life if they do not win me. If anyone’ should
strip me and show me to them, without a doubt
they would reproach themselves for being shortsighted to that extent and for falling in love with
things hateful and ugly.

HERMES 
Why is it, then, that even after they are in the
very midst of riches and have put the mask on their
own face, they are still deluded, and would sooner
lose their head than the mask if anyone should try
to take it away? Surely it is not likely that they
do not know that your beauty is put on when they
see all that is under it.
 
 RICHES 
There are many things that help me in this too,
Hermes.
 
 HERMES 
What are they ?
 
 RICHES 
When a man, on first encountering me, opens his
doors and takes me in, Pride, Folly, Arrogance,
Effeminacy, Insolence, Deceit, and myriads more,

 

enter unobserved in my train. Once his soul is
obsessed by all these, he admires what he should not
admire and wants what he should shun; he worships
me, the progenitor of all these ills that have come in,
because I am attended by them, and he would
endure anything in the world rather than put up
with losing me.

HERMES 
But how smooth and slippery you are, Riches,
how hard to hold and how quick to get away! You
offer people no secure grip at all, but make your
escape through their fingers in some way or other,
like an eel or a snake. Poverty, on the other hand,
is sticky and easy to grip, and has no end of hooks
growing out all over her body, so that when people
come near her she lays hold of them at once and
cannot be disengaged easily. But in the midst of
our gossip we have forgotten something rather
important.
 
 RICHES 
What is it?
 
 HERMES 
We have not brought along Treasure, whom we
needed most.

RICHES 
Be easy on that score; I always leave him on
earth when I go up to you, bidding him to stay at home
with the door locked and not to open to anyone
unless he hears me calling.
 
 HERMES 
Well, then, let’s alight in Attica now. Take hold
of my cloak and follow me till I reach the outlying
farm.

 

 RICHES 
It is very good of you to lead me, Hermes, for if
you should leave me behind I would soon run against
Hyperbolus or Cleon as I strayed about. But what
is that noise as of iron on stone?

HERMES 
Our friend Timon is digging ina hilly and stony
piece of ground close by. Oho, Poverty is with him,
and so is Toil; likewise Endurance, Wisdom, Manliness, and the whole host of their fellows that serve
under Captain Starvation, a far better sort than your
henchmen.
 
 RICHES 
Then why not beat a retreat as quickly as possible,
Hermes? We can’t accomplish anything worth
mentioning with a man that is hedged in by such an
army.
 
 HERMES 
Zeus thought differently, so let’s not be cowardly.

POVERTY 
Where are you going with that person whom you
have by the hand, Hermes?
 
 HERMES 
Zeus sent us to Timon here.
 
 POVERTY 
Is he sending Riches to Timon now, when I have
made a noble and a valuable man of him, after taking
him over in a wretched plight that was due to Luxury
and putting him in charge of Wisdom and Toil?
Then am I, Poverty, so easy to slight, think you,
and so easy to wrong that I can be robbed of my

 

only possession after I have thoroughly perfected
him in virtue, in order that Riches, taking him over
again and giving him into the hands of Insolence
and Pride, may make him soft, unmanly and base as
before, and then return him to me reduced to a
clout?
 
 HERMES 
It was the will of Zeus, Poverty.

POVERTY 
I am going; follow me, Toil and Wisdom and the
rest of you. ‘This man will soon find out whom he is
deserting in me—a good helpmate and a teacher of
all that is best, through whose instruction he kept
well in body and sound in mind, leading the life of
a real man, relying on himself and holding all this
abundance and excess to be nothing to him, as indeed
it is.
 
 HERMES 
They are going ; let us approach him.

TIMON 
Who are you, plague take you, and what do you
want that you come here to bother a man at work
and earning his wage? You will go away sorry
that you came, vile wretches that you are, every one
of you; for I'll very soon throw these clods and
stones at you and break every bone in your bodies.
 
 HERMES 
No, no, Timon! don’t throw at us, for we are not
men. I am Hermes and this is Riches. We were
sent by Zeus in answer to your prayers. So desist
from your labours and accept prosperity, and good
luck to you!

 

 TIMON 
You shall catch it too, even if you are gods, as you
say, for I hate all alike, both gods and men, and as
for this blind fellow, whoever he may be, I shall
certainly break his head with my pick.
 
 RICHES 
Let’s go, Hermes, in the name of Zeus, in order
that I may not come to some harm before going ; for
the man is uncommonly crazy, it seems to me.

HERMES 
Let’s have no roughness, Timon. Lay aside this
excessive rudeness and asperity, stretch out your
hands and take your good fortune. Be rich once
more and a leading man in Athens, and cut the
acquaintance of those ingrates of old, keeping your
wealth to yourself.
 
 TIMON 
I don’t want anything of you; don’t bother me. My
pick is riches enough for me, and in all other respects
I am as happy as can be if only nobody comes near
me.
 
 HERMES 
Such an uncivil answer, friend ?

 Will you I carry to Zeus those words so repellent
and stubborn ? 
 Iliad, 15, 202 


True enough, it is reasonable for you to hate men
after they have treated you so horribly, but not in
the least to hate the gods, who take such good care
of you.

TIMON 
I am very much obliged to you, Hermes, and to

 

Zeus for the care, but I must decline to take your
friend Riches.
 
 HERMES 
Why, pray?
 
 TIMON 
Because in bygone days he caused me_ infinite
harm by giving me over to toadies, setting plotters
upon me, stirring up hatred against me, corrupting
me with high living, making me envied and finally
abandoning me in such a faithless and traitorous way.
But my good friend Poverty developed my body
with tasks of the most manly sort, conversed with
me truthfully and frankly, gave me all that I needed
if only I worked for it, and taught me to despise the
wealth I once cherished, making me depend upon
myself for my hope of a living and showing me
wherein lay my own riches, which could not be
taken away either by a toady with flattery or by a
blackmailer with threats, by a mob in a gust of
passion, a voter with his ballot or a tyrant with his
intrigues.

Strengthened, therefore, by my labours, I
work upon this farm with pleasure in my toil, secing
nothing of the ills in the city and getting ample and
suflicient sustenance from my pick. So wend your
way back again, Hermes, taking Riches up to Zeus.
For my part, I should be content if I could bring
sorrow to the whole world, young and old alike.
 
 HERMES 
Don’t say that, my friend; they do not all deserve
sorrow. Come, stop this childish display of illtemper and take Riches. Gifts that come from Zeus
are not to be flung away.
 

 RICHES 
Do you want ine to rcason with you, Timon, or
shall you be offended at me if I say anything ?
 
 TIMON 
Speak, but not at length nor with a preface, like a
rascally orator. I will endure a few words from you
for the sake of Hermes.

RICHES 
Perhaps I ought really to speak at length in
reply to so many charges made by you. However, judge whether I have wronged you as you
say. It is I who brought you everything that is
delightful,—honour, precedence, civic crowns, and
every form of luxury; and you were admired and
puffed and courted, thanks to me. On the other
hand, if you have suffered any cruel treatment at
the hands of the toadies, I am not to blame; rather
have I myself been wronged by you because you so
basely put me at the mercy of scoundrels who praised
you and bewitched you and intrigued against me in
every way. Again, in closing, you said that I
played you false; but on the contrary I could myself
bring that charge against you, for you drove me off
in every way and thrust me head-foremost out of
your house. That is why Poverty, whom you hold
so dear, has dressed you in this coat of skin instead
of a soft mantle of wool, So Hermes will testify
how ardently I besought Zeus not to make me come
to you again after you had treated me with such
hostility.

HERMES 
But now you see how mild he has become, Riches ;
so do not hesitate to remain with him. Timon, go

 

on digging without more ado, and you, Riches, bring
Treasure underneath his hoe, for ‘Treasure will obey
your call.
 
 TIMON 
I must comply, Hermes, and be rich again, for
what can a man do when the gods constrain him ?
But look at all the trouble you are plunging me
into, curse the luck! Until now I was leading the
happiest of lives, but in a moment, though I have
done no wrong, I am to receive so much gold and to
take on so many cares.

HERMES 
Endure it, Timon, for my sake, even if it is difficult
and unbearable, in order that those toadies may burst
with envy. And now I am going to fly up to Heaven
by way of Aetna.
 
 RICHES 
He has gone, it seems; for I infer it from the
fluttering of his wings. Wait here, and I will go
away and send Treasure to you. But, no, strike in.
Ho, Treasure of Gold! Submit to Timon and let
yourself be dug up. Dig, Timon, and bring down
deep strokes. I will leave you to yourselves.

TIMON 
Come, pick, be strong for me now and don’t flag in
the task of calling Treasure out of the depths to the
light of day. O Zeus, god of miracles! O gracious
Corybants! O Hermes, god of gain! Where did all
this gold come from? « Is this a dream? I am afraid
I may wake up and find nothing but ashes. No,


 

verily it is coined gold, red and heavy and mighty
good to look upon.

 O gold, thou fairest gift that comes to man! 
 Euripides, Danae, fr. 326 Nauck. 


In very truth you stand out like blazing fire, not only
by night but by day. 
 Come to me, my precious, my
pretty! Now I am convinced that Zeus once turned
into gold, for what maid would not open her bosom
and receive so beautiful a lover coming down through
the roof in a shower?

O Midas! O Croesus! O
treasures of Delphi! How little worth you are beside
Timon and the wealth of Timon! Yes, even the
king of Persia is not a match for me. 
 
Pick and darling coat of skin, it is best that I
should hang you up here as an offering to Pan. For
myself, I purpose now to buy the whole farm, build
a tower over the treasure just large enough for me
to live in, and have it for my tomb when I am dead. 
 
“Be it resolved and enacted into law, to be
binding for the rest of my life, that I shall associate
with no one, recognize no one and scorn everyone.
Friends, guests, comrades and Altars of Mercy 
shall be matter for boundless mockery.


To pity one
who weeps, to help one who is in need shall be a
misdemeanour and an infringement of the constitution. My life shall be solitary, like that of wolves;
Timon shall be my only friend,

and all others shall
be enemies and conspirators. To talk to any of
them shall be pollution, and if I simply see one of
them, that day shall be under a curse. In short,
they shall be no more than statues of stone or bronze
in my sight. I shall receive no ambassadors from


 

them and make no treaties with them, and the
desert shall sunder me from them. Tribe, clan,
deme and native land itself shall be inane and useless names, and objects of the zeal of fools. Timon
shall keep his wealth to himself, scorn everyone and
live in luxury all by himself, remote from flattery
and tiresome praise. He shall sacrifice to the gods
and celebrate his feast-days by himsclf, his own
sole neighbour and crony, shaking free of all others.




Be it once for all resolved that he shall give himself
the farewell hand-clasp when he comes to die, and
shall set the funeral wreath upon his own brow.

His favourite name shall be ‘the Misanthrope,’ and
his characteristic traits shall be testiness, acerbity,
rudeness, wrathfulness and inhumanity. If I see
anyone perishing in a fire and begging to have it put
out, I am to put it out with pitch and oil; and if
anyone is being swept off his feet by the river in
winter and stretches out his hands, begging me to
take hold, I am to push him in head-foremost,
plunging him down so deep that he cannot come up
again. In that way they will get what they deserve.
Moved by Timon, son of Echecratides, of Collytus ;
motion submitted to the assembly by the aforesaid
Timon.” 
 
Good! Let us pass this resolution and abide by
it stoutly.

Yet I would have given a great deal if
everybody could have found out somehow that I am
tremendously rich ; they would be fit to hang themselves over the thing. But what is this? I say,

 

what haste they make! They are running up from
all sides, dusty and out of breath, for they scent the
gold somehow or other. Shall I climb this hill and
drive them off with a skirmish fire of stones from
above, or shall I break the law to the extent of
talking to them just this once, in order that they
may be hurt even more by being treated with contempt? That way is better, I think; so let us
stand our ground now and receive them. Let me
see, who is the first of them? Gnathonides the
toady, the man who gave me a rope the other day
when I asked for a loan, though often he has spewed
up whole jars of wine at my house. I am glad he
came: he shall be the first to smart.

GNATHONIDES 
Didn’t I say that the gods would not neglect an
upright man like Timon? Good day to you, Timon,
first in good looks, first in good manners and first in
good fellowship.
 
 TIMON 
The same to you, Gnathonides, first of all vultures
in voracity and first of all mankind in rascality.
 
 GNATHONIDES 
You are always fond of your joke. But where
are we to dine? I have brought you a new song
from one of the plays that have just been put on.
 
 TIMON 
I assure you, it will be a very mournful dirge that
you will sing, with this pick of mine to prompt you.

 

 GNATHONIDES 
What’s this? A blow, Timon? I appeal to the
witnesses. O Heracles! Oh! Oh! I summon you
before the Areopagus for assault and battery.
 
 TIMON 
If you will only linger one moment more, the
summons will be for murder.
 
 GNATHONIDES 
No, no! Do heal my wound, at least, by putting
alittle gold on it. That is a wonderful specific for
staunching blood.
 
 TIMON 
What, are you still bent on staying ?
 
 GNATHONIDES 
I am going; but you shall be sorry that you left
off being a gentleman and became such a boor.

TIMON 
Who is this coming up, with the bald pate?
Philiades, the most nauseous toady of them all.
He received from me a whole farm and a dower of
two talents for his daughter in payment for praising
me once, when I had sung a song and everybody else
kept still, but he lauded me to the skies, vowing on
his word of honour that I was a better singer than a
swan. Yet when he saw me ill the other day and I
went up to him and begged for alms, the generous
fellow bestowed a thrashing on me.

PHILIADES 
Oh, what effrontery! So you all recognize Timon
now? So Gnathonides is his friend and booncompanion now? Then he has had just what he
deserved for being so thankless. But we, who are
old acquaintances and schoolmates and neighbours,

 

go slow in spite of that, in order not to appear too
forward. Good day, sir; be on your guard against
these despicable toadies who are only concerned
with your table and otherwise are no better than
ravens. You can’t trust anybody nowadays; everyone is thankless and wicked. For my part, I was
just bringing you a talent so that you might have
something to use for your pressing needs when I
heard on the way, not far from here, that you were
tremendously rich. So I have come to give you this
advice. But as you are so wise, perhaps you will
have no need of suggestions from me, for you could
even tell Nestor what to do in an emergency.
 
 TIMON 
No doubt, Philiades. But come here, so that I
may give you a friendly greeting with my pick !
 
 PHILIADES 
Help! The ingrate has broken my head because I
gave him good advice.

TIMON 
Lo and behold! here comes a third, the orator
Demeas, holding a resolution in his hand and saying
that he is a relative of mine. That fellow paid the
city treasury sixteen talents within a single day,
getting his money from me, for he had been condemned to a fine and put in jail while it was unpaid.
And yet when it became his duty recently to
distribute the show-money to the Erechtheis tribe, 
and I went up and asked for my share, he said he
did not recognize me as a citizen !

DEMEAS 
Good day, Timon, great benefactor of your kin,
bulwark of Athens, shield of Greece! ‘The assembly
and both the councils are in session and awaiting
your pleasure this long time. But before you go,
listen to the resolution that I drew up in your
behalf.
“Whereas Timon of Collytus, the son of Echecratides, a man who is not only upright but wise beyond
any other in Greece, labours always in the best
interests of the city, and has won the boxing match,
the wrestling match, and the foot-race at Olympia in
a single day, as well as the horse-races, both with
the regular chariot and with the span of colts””— -
 
 TIMON 
But I never was even a delegate to the games at
Olympia !
 
 DEMEAS 
What of that? You will be, later. It is best to
put in plenty of that sort of thing.
— "and fought bravely for the city at Acharnae vee
and cut to pieces two divisions of Spartans"—

TIMON 
What do you mean by that? I wasn’t even posted
on the muster-roll because I had no arms.
 
 DEMEAS 
You are modest in talking about yourself, but we
should be ungrateful if we failed to remember.
— “and furthermore has been of great service to
the city by drawing up resolutions and serving on
the council and acting as general ;

 

“On all these grounds be it resolved by the
council, the assembly, the panel of jurors, the tribes
and the demes, both severally and in common, to erect
a golden statue of Timon beside Athena on the
Acropolis with a thunderbolt in his hand and a halo 
upon his head, and to crown him with seven crowns
of gold, said crowns to be awarded by proclamation
to-day at the Dionysia when the new tragedies
are performed ; for the Dionysia must be held to-day
on his account. Moved by the orator Demeas, his
next of kin and his pupil; for Timon is an excellent
orator and anything else that he wants to be.”

There you have the resolution. I wish I had
brought my son to see you; I have called him Timon
after you.
 
 TIMON 
How can that be, Demeas, when you aren't even
married, as far as I know?
 
 DEMEAS 
No, but I am going to marry next year, Zeus
willing, and havea child ; and I now name it Timon,
for it will be a boy.
 
 TIMON 
Perhaps you don’t care to marry now, sirrah, on
getting such a clout from me.
 
 DEMEAS 
Oh! Oh! What does this mean? Timon, you
are trying to make yourself tyrant and you are
beating free men when you yourself have not a clear
title to your freedom. You shall soon pay for this,
and for burning the Acropolis too.

TIMON 
But the Acropolis has not been burned, you
scoundrel, so it is plain that you are a blackmailer.
 
 DEMEAS 
Well, you got your money by breaking into the
treasury.
 
 TIMON 
That has not been broken into, so you can’t make
good with that charge either. -
 
 DEMEAS 
The breaking in will be done later, but you have
all the contents now.
 
 TIMON 
Well then, take that !
 
 DEMEAS 
Oh, my back !
 
 TIMON 
Don’t shriek or I will give you a third. It would
be too ridiculous if I had cut up two divisions of
Spartans unarmed and then couldn’t thrash a single
filthy little creature like you. My victory at Olympia
in boxing and wrestling would be all for nothing !

But what have we here? Isn’t this Thrasyc yeles ?
No other! With his beard spread out and his eyebrows uplifted, he marches along deep in haughty
meditation, his eyes glaring like a Titan’s and his
hair tossed back from his forehead, a typical Boreas
or Triton such as Zeuxis used to paint. Correct in
his demeanour, gentlemanly in his gait, and inconspicuous in his dress, in the morning hours he discourses forever about virtue, arraigns s the votaries of
pleasure and praises contentment with little; but
when he comes to dinner after his bath and the

 

waiter hands him a large cup (and the stiffer it is, the
better he likes it) then it is as if he had drunk the
water of Lethe, for his practice is directly opposed to
his preaching of the morning. He snatches the
meat away from others like a kite, elbows his neighbour, covers his beard with gravy, bolts his food like
a dog, bends over his plate as if he expected to find
virtue in it, carefully wipes out the dishes with his
forefinger so as not to leave a particle of the sauce,
and grumbles continually, even if he gets the whole
cake or the whole boar to himself.

He is the height
of gluttony and insatiability, and he gets so drunken
and riotous that he not only sings and dances, but
even abuses people and flies into a passion. Besides
he has much to say over his cup—more then than at
any other time, in fact!—about temperance and
decorum, and he says all this when he is already in a
bad way from taking his wine without water and
stammers ridiculously. Then a vomit follows, and at
last he is picked up and carried out of the diningroom, catching at the flute girl with both hands as he
goes. But even when sober, he won’t yield the
palm to anyone in lying and impudence and covetousness ; on the contrary, he is a peerless toady and
he perjures himself with the greatest facility ; humbug is his guide and shamelessness his follower, and
to sum it up, he is a wonderfully clever piece of
work, correct in every detail and perfect in a world
of ways. Therefore he shall soon smart for ;his
superiority. (To Thrasycles): Well, well! I say,
Thrasycles, you are late.

THRASYCLES 
I have not come with the same intent as all this
crowd, Timon. Dazzled by your riches, they have
gathered at a run in the expectation of silver and
gold and costly dinners, meaning to exercise unlimited flattery upon a man so simple and so free
with his gear. You know, of course, that for me
barley-cake is dinner enough, and the sweetest relish
is thyme or cardamom, or if ever I were to indulge
myself, a trifle of salt. My drink is the water of
Nine-spouts, and this philosopher’s mantle suits me
better than any purple robe. As for gold, I hold it
in no higher worth than yonder pebbles on the shore.
It was on your account that I came, in order that
you might not be corrupted by wealth, that most
iniquitous and insidious of possessions, which, many
a time to many a man, has proved a source of irreparable misfortunes. If you take my advice, you will
by all means throw the whole of it into the sea, for it
is not at all essential to a virtuous man who can discern the riches of philosophy; but don’t throw it into
the deep water, my dear fellow: just wade in as far
as your waist and toss it a short distance outside the
breakers, with none but me to see you.

However, if
you are unwilling to do this, then bundle it out of the
house quickly in another and a better way without
leaving as much as a copper for yourself by distributing it to all the needy, five drachmas to this
man, a mina to that one and half a talent to a third.
If a philosopher should apply he ought to get a
double or a triple portion. As for me, I do not ask
for it on my own account but to share with those of
my comrades who are needy, and it will be plenty if

 

you let me have the fill of this wallet, which holds
not quite two bushels Aeginetan. A man in
philosophy should be easily satisfied and temperate,
and should limit his aspirations to his wallet.
 
 TIMON 
Well said, Thrasycles! But instead of filling the
wallet, please allow me to fill your head with lumps,
measured out with my pick.
 
 THRASYCLES 
Democracy and the Laws! The scoundrel is
beating me, in a free city !
 
 TIMON 
What are you angry about, my dear fellow? Surely
I haven’t given you short measure ? Come, Pll throw
in four pecks over the amount !

But what have we here? They are gathering in
swarms; I see Blepsias yonder, Laches, Guipho and
the whole crew of my intended victims. Why not
climb this rock, give my long-wearied pick a little
rest and handle the situation without it, collecting all
the stones I can and raining them down on those
fellows from a distance ?
 
 BLEPSIAS 
Don’t throw at us, Timon; we are going away.

 
 TIMON 
But not without bloodshed and wounds, I promise
you!

 

contemporaries the life that he found in books. was more
Interesting and_more réal than. that, in°which he lived and
“moved. What his satire Toses in pungency on this account,
it gains in universality of appeal.