The fly is not the smallest of winged creatures, at
least in comparison with gnats and midges and things
still tinier. On the contrary, she is as much larger
than they as she is smaller than the bee. She is not
provided with feathers like the birds,
 
so as to have
some for plumage all over her body, and others to fly
with, but like grasshoppers, locusts and bees, she has
membranous wings, as much thinner’ than theirs as
Indian stuffs are more delicate and softer than Greek.
Moreover, they have the colours of a peacock in
them, if you look at her sharply when she spreads
them and flies in the sun.

She does not fly like
bats with a steady, oar-like movement of the wings,
or like grasshoppers with a spring, or as wasps do,
with a whizzing rush, but easily directs her course to
any quarter of the air she will. She has also this
characteristic, that her flight is not silent but musical :
the sound is not shrill like that of gnats and midges,
nor deep-toned like that of bees, nor fierce and



 

threatening like that of wasps; it is much more
melodious, just as flutes are sweeter than trumpet
and cymbals.

As for her body, the head is very
delicately attached to the neck and so is easily
moved, not fixed like the head of a grasshopper.
The eyes are prominent, and have much the quality
of horn, The breast is solid, and the legs grow
right out of the waist, which is not at all pinched*
up, as in wasps. As in them, the abdomen is
armoured and resembles a corselet in having flat
zones and scales. She differs, however, from the
wasp and the bee, in that her weapon is not the
hinder-part, but the mouth, or rather the proboscis ;
for, like the elephant, she has a trunk with which
she forages, seizing things and holding them tenaciously, since it is like a tentacle at the end. A
tooth protrudes from it with which the fly inflicts
bites in order to drink the blood, for although she
drinks milk, she likes blood also. The bite causes no
great pain. Though she has six feet, she walks with
only four and uses the two in fwont for all the
purposes of hands. You can see her standing on
four legs, holding up something to eat in her hands
just as we human beings do.

The fly is not born in the form which I have described, but as a maggot from the dead bodies of men
or animals. Then, little by little, she puts out
legs, grows her wings, changes from a creeping
to a flying thing, is impregnated and becomes mother
to a little maggot which is to-morrow’s fly. Living


 

in the society of man, on the same. food and at the
same table, she eats everything except oil: to taste
this is death to her. Being the creature of a day—
for life is meted out to her in very scant measure—
she likes sunshine best and goes about her affairs in
it. At night she keeps quiet and does not fly or
sing, but hides away and is still.

I can also mention
her great intelligence in escaping her designing foe,
the spider. She watches for him lurking in ambush,
and is wary of him, turning aside from his attack,
so as not to be captured by being ensnared and
falling into the toils of the creature. Of her courage
and bravery it is not for me to speak, but for Homer,
the most mighty-mouthed of the poets ; for when he ,
seeks to praise the foremost of the heroes, 
he does
not compare his bravery to a lion’s or a leopard’s or
a wild boar’s, but to the fearlessness of the fly and
the daring and insistency of her attack. He does
not say that she is reckless, but fearless :
 
that even
if she is kept away she does not desist but is eager
to bite. So outspoken is he in his praise and fondness for the fly that he mentions her net merely
once or twice but often; in consequence, references
to her enhance the beauty of his poems. Now he
describes her swarming flight after milk ; now, when




 

Athena turns the arrow aside from Menelaus in order
that it may not strike a vital spot, he likens her to a
mother tending a sleeping child, and again introduces
the fly into the comparison. 
Moreover, he has adorned
them with fine epithets in calling them “clustering”
and their swarms “hordes.”

So strong is the fly that when she bites she
wounds the skin of the ox and the horse as well as
that of man. She even torments the elephant by
entering his wrinkles and lancing him with her
proboscis as far as its length allows. In mating,
love, and marriage they are very free and easy.
The male is not on and off again in a moment,
like the cock; he covers the female a long time.
She carries her spouse, and they take wing together,
mating uninterruptedly in the air, as everyone
knows. A fly with her head cut off keeps alive a
long time with the rest of her body, and still retains
the breath of life.

You may be sure I propose to mention the most
important point in the nature of the fly. It is, I
think, the only point that Plato overlooks in his
discussion of the soul and its immortality. When
ashes are sprinkled on a dead fly, she revives and
has a second birth and a new life from the beginning. This should absolutely convince everyone
that the fly’s soul is immortal like ours, since after
leaving the body it comes back again, recognises
and reanimates it, and makes the fly take wing. It
also confirms the story that the soul of Hermotimus
of Clazomenae would often leave him and go away



 

by itself, and then, returning, would occupy his
body again and restore him to life.

Knowing not labour and living at large, the. fly
enjoys the fruits of the toil of others, and finds a
bounteous table set everywhere. Goats give milk
for her, bees work for flies and for men quite as
much as for themselves, and cooks sweeten food for
her. She takes precedence even of kings in eating,
and walks about on their tables sharing their feasts
and all their enjoyment.

She does not make a nest
or habitation in any one place, but taking up a
roving, Scythian life on the wing, finds bed and
board wherever night chances to overtake her. But
in the dark, as I have said, she does nothing: she
has no desire for stealthy actions and no thought
of disgraceful deeds which would discredit her if
they were done by daylight.

The story goes that long ago there was a human
being called Muia, a girl who was very pretty, but
talkative, noisy, and fond of singing. She became a
‘rival of Selene by falling in love with Endymion, and
as she was for ever waking the boy out of his sleep
by chattering and singing and paying him visits, he
became vexed at her, and Selene in anger turned
her into the fly we know.
 
So, in remembrance of
Endymion, she begrudges all sleepers their repose,
especially those of tender years; and even her
biting and bloodthirstiness is not a sign of savagery,
but of love and friendship. She gets what


 

satisfaction she can, and culls something of the bloom of
beauty.

According to the ancients she has had two
namesakes, a very pretty and accomplished poetess
and a famous Athenian courtesan. It was the
latter whom the comic poet meant when he said,
“Yon fly him to the heart did bite.” From this
you see that comic wit has not disdained the name
of fly nor barred it from the boards, and that parents
have not been ashamed to give it to their daughters.
As for tragedy, it, too, mentions the fly with great
praise; for example, in these words:
 
 'Tis strange that while the fly with hardy
strength 
 Encounters man to sate itself with gore, 
 Stout men-at-arms should fear the foeman’s
lance! 

 unknown (Nauck, Tag. Graec. Fragm., adesp. 
I could also say a great deal about Muia, the Pytha
gorean, if her story were not known to everyone.

There are very large flies, too, which most
people call camp-flies, though some call them
dog-flies. They have a very harsh buzz and.a
very rapid flight. They are extremely long-lived,
and endure the whole winter without food, usually
hiding in the roof. Another surprising thing in





 

them is that they are bisexual, like the child of
Hermes and Aphrodite, who had two natures and
double beauty.
Though I still have a great deal to say, I will stop
talking, for fear you may think that, as the saying
goes, I am making an elephant out of a fly.