LYCINUS 
Well, Crato, this is a truly forceful indictment
that you have brought, after long preparation, I
take it, against dances and the dancer’s art itself,
and besides against us who like to see that sort of
show, accusing us of displaying great interest in
something unworthy and effeminate ; but now let me
tell you how far you have missed the mark and
how blind you have been to the fact that you were
indicting the greatest of all the good things in life.
For that I can excuse you if, having been wedded to
a rude creed from the first and considering only
what is hard to be good, through unacquaintance
with it all you have thought that it deserved indicting.

CRATO 
Who that is a man at all, a life-long friend of letters,
moreover, and moderately conversant with philosophy, abandons his interest, Lycinus, in all that
is better and his association with the ancients to sit
enthralled by the flute, watching a girlish fellow play
the wanton with dainty clothing and bawdy songs and
imitate love-sick minxes, the most erotic of all
antiquity, such as Phaedra and Parthenope and
 

Rhodope, every bit of this, moreover, accompanied
by strumming and tootling and tapping of feet ?? 
—a ridiculous business in all truth, which does
not in the least become a freeborn gentleman
of your sort. So for my part, when I learned that
you give your time to such spectacles, I was not
only ashamed on your account but sorely distressed
that you should sit there oblivious of Plato and
Chrysippus and Aristotle, getting treated like people
who have themselves tickled in the ear with a feather,
and that too when there are countless other things
to hear and see that are worth while, if one wants
them—flute-players who accompany cyclic choruses,
singers of conventional compositions for the lyre, and
in especial, grand tragedy and comedy, the gayest
of the gay ; all these have even been held worthy to
figure in competitions.

“You will need, therefore, to do a great deal of
pleading in your own defence, my fine fellow, when
you confront the enlightened, if you wish to avoid
being eliminated absolutely and expelled from the
fold of the serious-minded. And yet the better course
for you, I suppose, is to mend the whole matter b
pleading not guilty and not admitting at all that you
have committed any such misdemeanour. Anyhow,
keep an eye to the future and see to it that you do
not surprise us by changing from the man that you
were of old to a Lyde or a Bacche. That would be
a reproach not only to you but to us, unless, follow-





 

ing the example of Odysseus, we can pull you away
from your lotus and fetch you back to your wonted
pursuits before you unwittingly fall quite under the
spell of these Sirens in the theatre. But those other
Sirens assailed only the ears, so that wax alone was
needed for sailing past them; you, however, seem
to have been subjugated from top to toe, through
the eyes as well as the ears.

LYCINUS 
Heavens, Crato, what sharp teeth there are in this
dog of yours that you have let loose on us! But as
for your parallel, the simile of the Lotus-Eaters
and the Sirens, it seems to me quite unlike what I
have been through, since in the case of those who
tasted the lotus and heard the Sirens, death was
the penalty for their eating and listening, while in
my case not only is the pleasure more exquisite
by a great deal but the outcome is happy; I am not
altered into forgetfulness of things at home or
ignorance of my own concerns, but—if I may speak
my mind without any hesitancy—I have come back
to you from the theatre with far more wisdom and
more insight into life. Or rather, I may well put it
just as Homer does: he who has seen this spectacle

 
 
 Goes on his way diverted and knowing more than
aforetime. 
 
 Odyssey, XII, 188. 
 

 CRATO 
Heracles, Lycinus! How deeply you have been
affected! You are not even ashamed of it all but
actually seem proud. In fact, that is the worst part of
it: you do not show us any hope of a cure when you
dare to praise what is so shameful and abominable.

LYCINUS 
Tell me, Crato, do you pass this censure upon
dancing and what goes on in the theatre after having
seen it often yourself, or is it that without being
acquainted with the spectacle, you nevertheless
account it shameful and abominable, as you put it?
If you have seen it, you have put yourself on the same
footing with us; if not, take care that your censure
does not seem unreasonable and overbold when you
denounce things of which you know nothing.
 
 CRATO 
Why, is that what was still in store for me—with
beard so long and hair so grey, to sit in the midst of
a parcel of hussies and a frantic audience like that,
clapping my hands, moreover, and shouting very
unbecoming words of praise to a noxious fellow who
doubles himself up for no useful purpose ?
 
 LYCINUS 
This talk is excusable in your case, Crato. But if
you would only take my word for it and just for the
experiment’s sake submit, with your eyes wide open,
T know very well that you could not endure not to
get ahead of everyone else in taking up an advantageously placed seat from which you could see well and
hear everything.
 
 CRATO 
May I never reach ripeness of years if I ever
endure anything of the kind, as long as my legs
are hairy and my beard unplucked! At present I


 

quite pity you; to the dismay of the rest of us, you
have become absolutely infatuated !

LYCINUS 
Then are you willing to leave off your abuse, my
friend, and hear me say something about dancing
and about its good points, showing that it brings not
only pleasure but benefit to those who see it; how
much culture and instruction it gives; how it imports
harmony into the souls of its beholders, exercising
them in what is fair to see, entertaining them with
what is good to hear, and displaying to them joint
beauty of soul and body? That it does all this with
the aid of music and rhythm would not be reason to
blame, but rather to praise it.
 
 CRATO 
I have little leisure to hear a madman praise his
own ailment, but if you want to flood me with nonsense, I am ready to submit to it as a friendly
service and lend you my ears, for even without wax
I can avoid hearing rubbish. So now I will hold my
peace for you, and you may say all that you wish
as if nobody at all were listening.

LYCINUS 
Good, Crato; that is what I wanted most. You
will very soon find out whether what I am going to
say will strike you as nonsense. First of all, you
appear to me to be quite unaware that this practice
of dancing is not novel, and did not begin yesterday
or the day before, in the days of our grandfathers,
for instance, or in those of their grandfathers. No,

 

those historians of dancing who are the most
veracious can tell you that Dance came into being
contemporaneously with the primal origin of the
universe, making her appearance together with
Love—the love that is age-old. In fact, the concord
of the heavenly spheres, the interlacing of the
errant planets with the fixed stars, their rhythmic
agreement and timed harmony, are proofs that
Dance was primordial. Little by little she has
grown in stature and has obtained from time to time
added embellishments, until now she would seem
to have reached the very height of perfection and
to have become a highly diversified, wholly harmonious, richly musical boon to mankind.

In the beginning, they say, Rhea, charmed with
the art, ordered dances to be performed not only in
‘Phrygia by the Corybantes but in Crete by the
Curetes, from whose skill she derived uncommon
benefit, since they saved Zeus for her by dancing
about him; Zeus, therefore, might well admit that
he owes them a thank-offering, since it was through
their dancing that he escaped his father’s teeth.
They danced under arms, clashing their swords upon
their shields as they did so and leaping in a frantic,
warlike manner. 





 

Thereafter, all the doughtiest of the Cretans
practised it energetically and became excellent
dancers, not only the common sort but the men of
princely blood who claimed leadership. For example,
Homer calls Meriones a dancer, not desiring to discredit but to distinguish him; and he was so conspicuous and universally known for his dancing that
not only the Greeks but the very Trojans, though
enemies, were aware of this about him. They saw,
I suppose, his lightness and grace in battle, which
he got from the dance. The verses go something
like this :

 
 
 Meriones, in a trice that spear of mine would have stopped you, 
 Good as you are at the dance. 
 
 Iliad, XVI, 617-618. 
 


Nevertheless, it did not stop him, for as he was well
versed in dancing, it was easy for him, I suppose,
to avoid the javelins they launched at him.

Although I could mention many others among the
heroes who were similarly trained and made an
art of the thing, I consider Neoptolemus sufficient.
Though the son of Achilles, he made a great name for
himself in dancing and contributed to it the variety
which is most beautiful, called Pyrrhic after him;
and upon hearing this about his son, Achilles was
more pleased, I am sure, than over his beauty and
all his prowess. So, though till then Troy had been

 

impregnable, his skill in dancing took it and tumbled
it to the ground.

The Spartans, who are considered the bravest
of the Greeks, learned from Pollux and Castor to do
the Caryatic, which is another variety of dance
exhibited at Caryae in Lacedaemon, and they do
everything with the aid of the Muses, to the extent
of going into battle to the accompaniment of flute
and rhythm and well-timed step in marching;
indeed, the first signal for battle is given to the
Spartans by the flute. That is how they managed
to conquer everybody, with music and rhythm to
lead them. 

 
Even now you may see their young men studying
dancing quite as much as fighting under arms.
When they have stopped sparring and exchanging
blow for blow with each other, their contest ends
in dancing, and a flute-player sits in the middle,
playing them a tune and marking time with his foot,
while they, following one another in line, perform
figures of all sorts in rhythmic step, now those of




 

war and presently those of the choral dance, that
are dear to Dionysus and Aphrodite.

That is why
the song which they sing while dancing is an invocation of Aphrodite and of the Loves, that they may
join their revel and their dances. The second of the
songs, moreover—for two are sung—even contains
instruction how to dance: “Set your foot before you,
lads,” it says, “and frolic yet more featly,” that is,
dance better. 

 
The same sort of thing is done by those who dance
what is called the String of Beads.

That is a dance
of boys and girls together who move in a row and
truly resemble a string of beads. The boy precedes,
doing the steps and postures of young manhood,
and those which later he will use in war, while the
maiden follows, showing how to do the women’s
dance with propriety ; fence the string is beaded
with modesty and with manliness. In like manner
their Bareskin Plays are dancing.

Taking it that you have read what Homer has to
say about Ariadne in “The Shield,” and about the
chorus that Daedalus fashioned for her, I pass it
by; as also the two dancers whom the poet there
calls tumblers, who lead the chorus, and again what
he says in that same “Shield” : ‘ Youthful dancers
were circling”; which was worked into the shield
by Hephaestus as something especially beautiful. 
And that the Phaeacians should delight in dancing







 

was very natural, since they were people of refinement and they lived in utter bliss. In fact, Homer
has represented Odysseus as admiring this in them
above all else and watching “the twinkling of their
feet.””

In Thessaly the cultivation of dancing made such
progress that they used to call their front-rank
men and champions “fore-dancers.”” This is
demonstrated by the inscriptions upon the statues
which they dedicated in honour of those who showed
prowess in battle. “The citie,” they say, “hath
esteemed him fore-dancer;” and again, “To
Eilation the folk hath sett up thys ymage for that
he danced the bataille well.”

I forbear to say that not a single ancient mysterycult can be found that is without dancing, since they
were established, of course, by Orpheus and Musaeus,
the best dancers of that time, who included it
in their prescriptions as something exceptionally»
beautiful to be initiated with rhythm and dancing.
To prove that this is so, although it behoves me to
observe silence about the rites on account of the
uninitiate, nevertheless there is one thing that
everybody has heard; namely, that those who let
out the mysteries in conversation are commonly
said to “dance them out.”

At Delos, indeed, even the sacrifices were not
without dancing, but were performed with that
and with music. Choirs of boys came together,
and while they moved and sang to the accompaniment of flute and lyre, those who had been selected
from among them as the best performed an interpre-




 

tative dance. Indeed, the songs that were written
for these choirs were called Hyporchemes (interpretative dances), and lyric poetry is full of them.

Yet why do I talk to you of the Greeks? Even
the Indians, when they get up in the morning and
pray to the sun, instead of doing as we do, who think
that when we have kissed our hand the prayer is
complete, face the sunrise and welcome the God
of Day with dancing, posturing in silence and imitating the dance of the god; and that, to the Indians,
is prayer and dance and sacrifice all in one. So
they propitiate their god with those rites twice each
day, when it begins and when it declines.

The Ethiopians, moreover, even in waging war,
do it dancing, and an Ethiopian may not let fly the
shaft that he has taken from his head (for they use
the head in place of a quiver, binding the shafts
about it like rays) unless he has first danced, menacing
the enemy by his attitude and terrifying him in
advance by his prancing.

Since we have spoken of India and of Ethiopia,
it will repay us to make an imaginary descent into
Egypt, their neighbour. For it seems to me that the
ancient myth about Proteus the Egyptian means
nothing else than that he was a dancer, an imitative




 

fellow, able to shape himself and change himself
into anything, so that he could imitate even the
liquidity of water and the sharpness of fire in the
liveliness of his movement; yes, the fierceness of a
lion, the rage of a leopard, the quivering of a tree, and
in a word whatever he wished. Mythology, however,
on taking it over, described his nature in terms more
paradoxical, as if he became what he imitated. Now
just that thing is characteristic of the dancers to-day,
who certainly may be seen changing swiftly at the cue
and imitating Proteus himself. And we must suppose that in Empusa, who changes into countless
forms, some such person has been handed down by
mythology.

Next in order, it is proper that we should not forget
that Roman dance which the best-born among them,
called Salii (which is the name of a priesthood),
perform in honour of Ares, the most bellicose of the
gods—a dance which is at once very majestic and very
sacred.

And a Bithynian story, not very divergent,
moreover, from those current in Italy, says that
Priapus, a warlike deity, one of the Titans, I
suppose, or one of the Idaean Dactyls who made a
business of giving lessons in fencing, had Ares
put into his charge by Hera while Ares was still a
boy, though hard-muscled and immoderately virile ;
and that he did not teach him to handle weapons
until he had made him a perfect dancer. Indeed,
for this he even got a pension from Hera, to receive


 

from Ares in perpetuity a tenth of all that accrued
to him in war.

As to the Dionysiac and Bacchic rites, I expect you
are not waiting for me to tell you that every bit of
them was dancing. In fact, their most typical dances,
which are three in number, the Cordax, the Sicinnis,
and the Emmeleia, were invented by the attendants
of Dionysus, the Satyrs, who named them all after
themselves, and it was by the exercise of this art,
they say, that Dionysus subdued the Tyrrhenians,
the Indians, and the Lydians, dancing into subjection
with his bands of revellers a multitude so warlike.

Therefore, you amazing fellow, take care that it
isn’t impious to denounce a practice at once divine
and mystic, cultivated by so many gods, performed
in their honour, and affording at once amusement
and profitable instruction in such degree !
 

 Another thing surprises me in you, since I know
that you are a great lover of Homer and Hesiod—I
am going back, you see, to the poets once more—
how you dare contradict them when they praise
dancing above all things else. When Homer
enumerated all that is sweetest and best—sleep,
love, song, and dance —it was this alone that he
called “blameless,” and what is more, he ascribes
sweetness to song; but both these things pertain
to the dancer’s art, both dulcet song and blameless




 

dancing—which you now take it into your head to
blame! And again, in another part of his poetry: 

 
 
 One man getteth from God the gift of achievement in warfare, 
 One, the art of the dance, and song that stirreth the heart-strings. 
 
 The Theogony. 
 

Singing combined with dancing does in truth stir the
heart-strings, and it is the choicest gift of the gods.
Also, it appears that in classifying all activities
under two heads, war and peace, Homer has set
off against those of war these, and: these only, as
peerless.

As for Hesiod, who was not told by
someone else about the dancing of the Muses but
saw it himself at break of day, he begins his poem ?
by saying about them as the highest possible praise
that they “dance with delicate footfall about the
violet waters,” circling round the altar of their sire.
 

 In spite of this, my high-spirited friend, you
insult dancing almost to the point of quarrelling
with the wade and yet Socrates

(the wisest of
men, if we may believe Apollo, who said so) not
only commended it but wanted to learn it, attributing
the greatest value to observance of rhythm and
music, to harmonious movement and to gracefulness
of limb; and he was not ashamed, aged as he was,
to consider it one of the most important subjects
of study. He would, of course, be uncommonly
enthusiastic over dancing, since he did not hesitate
to study even what was trivial, and not only used to
attend the schools of the flute-girls, but did not




 

disdain to listen to serious discourse from Aspasia, a
courtesan. Yet the art was just beginning when he
saw it then, and had not yet been elaborated to such
a high degree of beauty. If he could see those who
now have advanced it to the utmost, that man, I
am sure, dropping everything else, would have
given his attention to this spectacle alone; and he
would not have had his young friends learn anything
else in preference to it.

Again, it seems to me that when you praise comedy
and tragedy, you have forgotten that in each of them
there is a special form of dance; that is to say, the
tragic is the Emmeleia and the comic the Cordax,
though sometimes a third form, the Sicinnis, is included also. But since at the outset you gave greater
honour to tragedy and comedy and cyclic fluteplayers and singing with the lyre than to the dance,
calling these competitive and therefore grand—
come, let us now compare each one of them with the
dance. And yet, suppose we omit the flute, if you
do not mind, and the lyre, since they are parts of the
dancer’s paraphernalia.

As far as tragedy is concerned, let us form our
first opinion of its character from its outward semblance. What a repulsive and at the same time
frightful spectacle is a man tricked out to disproportionate stature, mounted upon high clogs, wearing
a mask that reaches up above his head, with a mouth
that is set in a vast yawn as if he meant to swallow
up the spectators! I forbear to speak of pads for



 

the breast and pads for the paunch, wherewith he
puts on an adscititious, counterfeit corpulence, so that
the disproportion in height may not betray itself
the more conspicuously in a slender figure. Then
too, inside all this, you have the man himself bawling
out, bending forward and backward, sometimes
actually singing his lines, and (what is surely the
height of unseemliness) melodising his calamities,
holding himself answerable for nothing but his voice,
as everything else has been attended to by the poets,
who lived at some time in the distant past. To be
sure, as long as he is an Andromache or a Hecuba,
his singing can be tolerated; but when he enters
as Heracles in person and warbles a ditty, forgetting
himself and taking no shame either for the lion-skin
that he is wearing or for the club, a man in his right
mind may properly term the thing a solecism.

And by the way, the charge you were bringing
against the dance, that men imitate women, would
be a common charge against both tragedy and
comedy. Indeed, in them the female parts outnumber the male!

Moreover, comedy accounts the
ridiculousness of the masks themselves as part of
what is pleasing in her; for example, the masks of
Davuses and Tibiuses, and of cooks.
 

 On the other hand, that the appearance of the
dancer is seemly and becoming needs no assertion
on my part, for it is patent to all who are not blind.
His mask itself is most beautiful, and suited to the
drama that forms the theme; its mouth is not wide
open, as with tragedy and comedy, but closed, for
he has many people who do the shouting in his
stead.

In the past, to be sure, they themselves
both danced and sang; but afterwards, since the




 

panting that came of their movement disturbed their
singing, it seemed better that others should accompany them with song.

The themes of tragedy and the dance are common
to both, and there is no difference between those
of the one and those of the other, except that the
themes of the dance are more varied and more unhackneyed, and they contain countless vicissitudes.

If the dance does not feature in contests, I maintain
that it is because the governors of the games thought
the thing too important and too grand to be called
into competition. I forbear to mention that a city
in Italy, the fairest that belongs to the Chalcidian
race, has added it, by way of embellishment, to
the games that are held there.

At this point I should like to defend the numerous
omissions in my account, that I may not create an
impression that I lack sense or learning. I am not
unaware that many before our time who have
written about the dance have made it the chief matter
of their essays to enumerate all its forms and list
their names, telling what each is like and by whom
it was discovered, thinking to make a display of wide
learning thereby. But for my own part, first and
foremost, I think that to be zealous about these
things is tasteless, pedantic, and as far as I am concerned, out of place, and for that reason I pass them
over.

Besides, I want you to understand and remember that the topic which I have proposed for
myself at present is not to give the history of every
form of the dance, and I have not taken it upon
myself as the aim of my discussion to enumerate



 

names of dances, except for the few that I mentioned
at the outset, in touching upon the more characteristic of them. No, at present anyhow, the chief
object of my discussion is to praise the dance as
it now exists and to show how much that is pleasurable and profitable it comprises in its embrace,
although it did not begin to attain such a height of
beauty in days of old, but in the time of Augustus,
approximately. 

 

 
Those early forms were roots, so to speak, or
initial stages, of the dance; but the flowering of
it and the consummate fruition, which precisely
at this moment has been brought to the highest
point of perfection—that is what our discussion
treats of, omitting the Tongs and the Crane-dance 
and so forth as no longer having anything to do with
the dancing of to-day. And as to that “Phrygian”
form of the dance, the one that accompanied wine and
revelry, performed amidst drunkenness, generally
by peasants who executed, to the music of flutes
played by women, violent and trying gambols still
prevalent in the country districts, that too I have
not omitted out of ignorance but because those
gambols have nothing to do with our present dance.
As you know, Plato in the Laws praises certain
forms of the dance, but strongly condemns certain
others, dividing them with reference to what is



 

pleasurable and profitable and rejecting the more
unseemly sorts, but valuing and admiring the rest.

About the dance itself, let this suffice; for it would
be tasteless to prolong my discussion by taking up
everything. What qualifications the dancer on his
part ought to have, how he should have been trained,
what he should have studied, and by what means
he should strengthen his work, I shall now set forth
for you, to show you that Dance is not one of the
facile arts that can be plied without pains, but
reaches to the very summit of all culture, not only
in music but in rhythm and metre, and especially
in your own favourite, philosophy, both physics and
ethics. To be sure, Dance accounts philosophy’s
inordinate interest in dialectics inappropriate to
herself. From rhetoric, however, she has not held
aloof, but has her part in that too, inasmuch as
she is given to depicting character and emotion,
of which the orators also are fond. And she has not
kept away from painting and sculpture, but manifestly copies above all else the rhythm that is in
them, so that neither Phidias nor Apelles seems at
all superior to her.

Before all else, however, it behoves her to enjoy
the favour of Mnemosyne and her daughter Polymnia,
and she endeavours to remember everything. Like
Calchas in Homer, the dancer must know “what is,
and what shall be, and was of old,” so thoroughly
that nothing will escape him, but his memory of it
all will be prompt. To be sure, it professes in the
main to be a science of imitation and portrayal, of
revealing what is in the mind and making intelligible



 

what is obscure. What Thucydides said of Pericles
in praising the man would also be the highest possible
commendation of a dancer, “to know what is meet
and express it;” and by expressing I mean the
intelligibility of his postures. But his whole
accoutrement for the work is ancient story, as I
have said, and the prompt recollection and graceful
presentation of it.

Beginning with Chaos and the
primal origin of the world, he must know everything
down to the story of Cleopatra the Egyptian. 
Let this be the range we prescribe for the dancer’s
learning, and let him know thoroughly all that lies
within it: the castration of Uranus, the begetting of
Aphrodite, the battle of the Titans, the birth of Zeus,
the stratagem of Rhea, the substitution of the stone,
the fetters of Cronus, the casting of lots among the
three brothers.

Then, in order, the revolt of the
Giants, the theft of fire, the fashioning of man, 
the punishment of Prometheus, the power of the two
Erotes; and after that, the errancy of Delos, the







 

travail of Leto, the killing of Pytho, the plot of
Tityus, and the discovery of earths’ central point
by the flight of the eagles.

Next comes Deucalion, with the great shipwreck
of life in his time, and the single ark conserving a
remnant of the human race, and men created afresh
from stones. Then the dismemberment of Iacchus, 
the trick of Hera, the burning of Semele, the double
birth of Dionysus, the story of Athena and the story
of Hephaestus and Erichthonius, the rivalry for
Attica, Halirrhothius and the first trial on the
Areopagus, and in a word, Attic mythology complete ;

but particularly the wandering of Demeter, the
finding of Core, the visit to Celeus, the husbandry
of Triptolemus; the vine-planting of Icarius, and
the sad fate of Erigone; the story of Boreas, of
Oreithyia, of Theseus and Aegeus. Also, the
reception of Medea and her later flight to Persia,
the daughters of Erechtheus, and the daughters of
Pandion, with what they suffered and did in Thrace.
Then Acamas, Phyllis, the first rape of Helen, the
campaign of the Dioscuri against the city, the fate






 

of Hippolytus, and the return of the Heracleidae ;
for all this may properly be considered Attic. 

 
These Athenian tales that I have run over are
a very few by way of example out of the many that
have been omitted.

And next comes Megara, with
Nisus and Scylia, the purple lock, the expedient of
Minos, and his ingratitude towards his benefactress. 
To these succeed Cithaeron, with all that befell the
Thebans and the house of Labdacus; the advent
of Cadmus, the heifer’s taking ground, the serpent’s
teeth, and the emergence of the Sown Men; further,
the transformation of Cadmus into a serpent, the
rising of the walls to the music of the lyre, the
madness of the wall-builder, the boastfulness of his
wife Niobe, and her grief-stricken silence, the story
of Pentheus and of Actaeon, the story of Oedipus,
Heracles with all his labours, and the murder of his
children.

Then comes Corinth, also full of myths, since she
has Glauce and Creon, and before them Bellerophon
and Stheneboea, and the quarrel between Helius
and Poseidon; afterwards, the madness of Athamas,
the flight of the children of Nephele through the
air on the back of the ram, and the reception of Ino
and Melicertes.

Next is the story of the descendants of Pelops,
with Mycenae and what happened there, and
previously—Inachus, Io, and her warder Argus;
Atreus, Thyestes, Aerope, and the golden lamb;
the defloration of Pelopeia; the slaying of Agamemnon, and the punishment of Clytemestra. Even
before that, the expedition of the Seven Captains,
with Adrastus’ reception of the exiles who became
his sons-in-law, and the oracle about them, the
refusal to bury the fallen, and the death of Antigone
and Menoeceus on that account.

Also what happened on Nemean soil, the story of Hypsipyle and
Archemorus, is very essential for the dancer to
remember. And from an earlier time he will know
the enforced virginity of Danae, the birth of Perseus,
and the quest of the Gorgons which he assumed.
Related to this is the Ethiopian tale of Cassiopea,
Andromeda, and Cepheus, who have been placed
in the roll of constellations by the faith of men of
after time. And he will also know that ancient
tale of Aegyptus and Danaus, and the bride-night
plot.

Sparta, too, affords not a few stories of this sort : 
Hyacinthus, and Apollo’s rival, Zephyrus; the lad’s
slaying with the discus, the flower that came from
the blood, and the word of woe (AI) that is written






 

on it. Also the resurrection of Tyndareus, and
Zeus’s anger at Asclepius over it. Further, the
entertainment of Paris and the rape of Helen, after
his judgement in the matter of the apple.

For we
must recognise that there is a connecting bond
between Spartan story and that of Troy, which is
copious and full of parts to play; in fact, for each
person who fell there, a drama offers itself to the
theatre. These themes must be kept in mind above
all others, from the time of the rape straight through
to what happened in the “Home-farings,” with
the wandering of Aeneas and the love of Dido. 
 

 The dramas that centre upon Orestes, including
that hero’s adventures in Scythia, are not alien to
all this; and what went before is not incongruous,
either, but akin to the story of Troy—the virgin
life of Achilles in Scyros, the madness of Odysseus,
the marooning of Philoctetes, and, in general,
the whole wandering of Odysseus, including Circe,
Telegonus, Aeolus’ sway over the winds, and all
the rest of it, to the punishment of the suitors.
Also, preceding this, the plot against Palamedes, and
the wrath of Nauplius, the madness of Ajax, and the
death of the other Ajax among the rocks.

Elis too has many subjects for those who essay
the dance—Oenomaus and Myrtilus, Cronus and
Zeus, and the first contestants in the Olympic games ;

and the Arcadian mythology also is copious—the
flight of Daphne, the transformation of Callisto
into a wild beast, the drunken riot of the Centaurs,
the birth of Pan, the love of Alpheus, and his journey
into foreign parts beneath the sea.

Indeed, even if you go to Crete in fancy, the dance
garners very many contributions from there—
Europe, Pasiphae, both the bulls, the labyrinth,
Ariadne, Phaedra, Androgeos, Daedalus and Icarus,
Glaucus and the soothsaying skill of Polyidus, and
Talus, the bronze roundsman of Crete.

Or if you
cross over to Aetolia, there too the dance finds a
great deal—Althea, Meleager, Atalanta, the brand,
the wrestling-match between Heracles and the river
(Achelous), the birth of the Sirens, the emergence
of the Echinades, and the settlement of Alemaeon
there after his madness; then Nessus, and the
jealousy of Deianeira, and, consequent upon it,
the pyre in Oeta.

Thrace also has much that is essential to one who
intends to dance—Orpheus, his dismemberment
and his talking head that voyaged on the lyre; 






 

Haemus and Rhodope; the punishment of Lycurgus ;

and Thessaly affords still more—Pelias, Jason,
Alcestis, the expedition of the fifty youths, the Argo
and her talking keel, the incidents at Lemnos,
Aeétes, the dream of Medea, the dismemberment
of Apsyrtus, the happenings of the cruise,

and after
that, Protesilaus and Laodameia.

If you cross the sea again to Asia, there are many
dramas there—Samos, at the outset, with the fate
of Polycrates and his daughter’s wanderings, extending to Persia, and the stories that are still
older—the loquaciousness of Tantalus, the feast
of the gods at his house, the butchering of Pelops,
and his shoulder of ivory.

In Italy, moreover, we have the Eridanus, and
Phaethon, and the poplars that are his sisters,
mourning and weeping amber.

And a man of
the sort I have in mind will know about the
Hesperides, too, and the dragon that guards the
golden fruit, and the toil of Atlas, and about Geryon,
and the lifting of his cattle from Erytheia.

And




 

he will not fail to know all the fabulous transformations, the people who have been changed into trees or
beasts or birds, and the women who have turned into
men; Caeneus, I mean, and Tiresias, and their like.

In Phoenicia he will know about Myrrha and that
Syrian tale of dissevered woe, as well as the more
recent happenings that followed the establishment
of Macedonian rule, the bold deeds of Antipater
as well as those at the court of Seleucus over
the affections of Stratonice.

Since Egyptian tales
are somewhat mystic, he will know them, but will
present them more symbolically; I mean Epaphus
and Osiris and the transfigurations of the gods
into their bestial forms.
 

 Before all else, however, he will know the stories
of their loves, including the loves of Zeus himself,
and all the forms into which he changed himself,

and
also the whole show in the realm of Hades, with the
punishments and the reasons for each, and how the
comradeship of Peirithous and Theseus brought
them even to Hades.

To sum it up, he will not be
ignorant of anything that is told by Homer and
Hesiod and the best poets, and above all by tragedy.






 
 

 
These are a very few themes that I have selected
out of many, or rather out of an infinite number,
and set down as the more important, leaving the rest
for the poets to sing of, for the dancers themselves
to present, and for you to add, finding them by
their likeness to those already mentioned, all of
which must lie ready, provided and stored by the
dancer in advance to meet every occasion.

Since he is imitative and undertakes to present
by means of movements all that is being sung, it
is essential for him, as for the orators, to cultivate
clearness, so that everything which he presents will
be intelligible, requiring no interpreter. No, in the
words of the Delphic oracle, whosoever beholds
dancing must be able “to understand the mute
and hear the silent” dancer.

That is just what happened, they say, in the case
of Demetrius the Cynic. He too was denouncing
the dance just as you do, saying that the dancer
was a mere adjunct to the flute and the pipes and the
stamping, himself contributing nothing to the
presentation but making absolutely meaningless,
idle movements with no sense in them at all; but
that people were duped by the accessories of the
business—the silk vestments, the beautiful mask,
the flute and its quavers, and the sweet voices of the
singers, by all of which the dancer’s business, itself
amounting to nothing at all, was embellished.
Thereupon the dancer at that time, under Nero,



 

in high repute, who was no fool, they say, and
excelled, if ever a man did, in remembrance of
legends and beauty of movement, made a request
of Demetrius that was very reasonable, I think—to
see him dancing and then accuse him; he promised,
indeed, to perform for him without flute or songs.
That is what he did; enjoining silence upon the
stampers and flute-players and upon the chorus
itself, quite unsupported, he danced the amours of
Aphrodite and Ares, Helius tattling, Hephaestus
laying his plot and trapping both of them with his
entangling bonds, the gods who came in on them,
portrayed individually, Aphrodite ashamed, Ares
seeking cover and begging for mercy, and everything
that belongs to this story, in such wise that Demetrius
was delighted beyond measure with what was taking
place and paid the highest possible tribute to the
dancer; he raised his voice and shouted at the top
of his lungs: ‘I hear the story that you are acting,
man, I do not just see it; you seem to me to be
talking with your very hands!”

Since we are under Nero in fancy, I wish to tell
the remark of a barbarian concerning the same
dancer, which may be considered a very great tribute
to his art. One of the barbarians from Pontus, a
man of royal blood, came to Nero on some business
or other, and among other entertainments saw that
dancer perform so vividly that although he could
not follow what was being sung—he was but half
Hellenised, as it happened—he understood every-



 

thing. So when it came to be time for him to go back
to his own country, Nero, in saying good-bye,
urged him to ask for anything that he wanted, and
promised to give it him. “If you give me the
dancer,’ said he, “you will please me mightily!”
When Nero asked, “What good would he be to you
there?”, he replied, “I have barbarian neighbours
who do not speak the same language, and it is not
easy to keep supplied with interpreters for them.
If I am in want of one, therefore, this man will
interpret everything for me by signs.” So deeply
had he been impressed by that disclosure of the distinctness and lucidity of the mimicry of the dance.

The chief occupation and the aim of dancing, as I
have said, is impersonating, which is cultivated in
the same way by the rhetoricians, particularly those
who recite these pieces that they call “exercises”;
for in their case also there is nothing which we
commend more highly than their accommodating
themselves to the roles which they assume, so that
what they say is not inappropriate to the princes
or tyrant-slayers or poor people or farmers whom
they introduce, but in each of these what is individual
and distinctive is presented.

In that connection I should like to tell you something that was said by another barbarian. Noticing
that the dancer had five masks ready—the drama
had that number of acts—since he saw but the one
dancer, he enquired who were to dance and act the
other roles, and when he learned that the dancer
himself was to act and dance them all, he said;
“I did not realise, my friend, that though you have
only this one body, you have many souls.”

Well, that is the way the barbarian viewed it.
And the Greeks of Italy quite appropriately call
the dancer a pantomime, precisely in consequence of
what he does. That poetical precept, “My son,
in your converse with all cities keep the way of the
sea-creature that haunts the rocks,” is excellent,
and for the dancer essential; he must cleave close
to his matters and conform himself to each detail
of his plots. 

 
In general, the dancer undertakes to present and
enact characters and emotions, introducing now a
lover and now an angry person, one man afflicted
with madness, another with grief, and all this within
fixed bounds. Indeed, the most surprising part of
it is that within the selfsame day at one moment
we are shown Athamas in a frenzy, at another Ino
in terror; presently the same person is Atreus,
and after a little, Thyestes; then Aegisthus, or
Aerope; yet they all are but a single man.

Moreover, the other performances that appeal to
eye and ear contain, each of them, the display of a
single activity; there is either flute or lyre or vocal
music or tragedy’s mummery or comedy’s buffoonery. The dancer, however, has everything at
once, and that equipment of his, we may see, is
varied and comprehensive—the flute, the pipes, the
tapping of feet, the clash of cymbals, the melodious
voice of the actor, the concord of the singers.

Then, too, all the rest are activities of one or the
other of the two elements in man, some of them
activities of the soul, some of the body; but in
dancing both are combined. For there is display
of mind in the performance as well as expression of
bodily development, and the most important part
of it is the wisdom that controls the action, and
the fact that nothing is irrational. Indeed, Lesbonax
of Mytilene, a man of excellent parts, called dancers
“handiwise,” and used to go to see them with the
expectation of returning from the theatre a better
man. Timocrates, too, his teacher, one day, for the
sole and only time, came in by chance, saw a dancer
ply his trade and said: “What a treat for the eyes
my reverence for philosophy has deprived me of!”

If what Plato says about the soul is true, the three
parts of it are excellently set forth by the dancer
—the orgillous part when he exhibits a man in a
rage, the covetous part when he enacts lovers, and
the reasoning part when he bridles and governs each
of the different passions; this last, to be sure, is
disseminated through every portion of the dance
just as touch is disseminated through the other
senses. And in planning for beauty and for
symmetry in the figures of the dance, what else does
he do but confirm the words of Aristotle, who praised
beauty and considered it to be one of the three
parts of the chief good? Moreover, I have heard
a man express an excessively venturesome opinion





 

about the silence of the characters in the dance, to
the effect that it was symbolic of a Pythagorean
tenet.

Again, some of the other pursuits promise to give
pleasure and others profit, but only the dance has
both; and indeed the profit in it is far more beneficial for being associated with pleasure. How much
more delightful it is to see than young men boxing,
astream with blood, and other young men wrestling
in the dust! Why, the dance often presents them
in a way that is less risky and at the same time more
beautiful and pleasurable. As to the energetic
movement of the dance, its twists and turns and
leaps and back-flung poses, they are really not only
pleasurable to the spectators, but highly healthful
for the performers themselves. I should call it the
most excellent and best balanced of gymnastic exercises, since besides making the body soft, supple and
light, and teaching it to be adroit in shifting, it also
contributes no little strength.

Then why is not dancing a thing of utter harmony, putting a fine edge upon the soul, disciplining
the body, delighting the beholders and teaching
them much that happened of old, to the accompaniment of flute and cymbals and cadenced song and
magic that works its spell through eye and ear
alike? If it is felicity of the human voice that you
seek, where else can you find it or what can you hear
that is more richly vocal or more melodious? If it
is the high-pitched music of the flute or of the syrinx,


 

in the dance you may enjoy that also to the full. I
forbear to mention that you will become better in
character through familiarity with such a spectacle,
when you see the assembly detesting misdeeds, weeping over victims of injustice, and in general schooling the characters of the individual spectators.

But
let me tell you in conclusion what is particularly to
be commended in our dancers: that they cultivate
equally both strength and suppleness of limb seems
to me as amazing as if the might of Heracles and
the daintiness of Aphrodite were to be manifested
in the same person.

I wish now to depict for you in words what a good
dancer should be like in mind and in body. To be
sure, I have already mentioned most of his mental
qualities. I hold, you know, that he should be
retentive of memory, gifted, intelligent, keenly
inventive, and above all successful in doing the
right thing at the right time; besides, he should be
able to judge poetry, to select the best songs and
melodies, and to reject worthless compositions.

What I propose to unveil now is his body, which will
conform to the canon of Polyclitus. It must be
neither very tall and inordinately lanky, nor short
and dwarfish in build, but exactly the right measure,
without being either fat, which would be fatal to
any illusion, or excessively thin; for that would
suggest skeletons and corpses.

To illustrate, I should like to tell you about the
cat-calls of a certain populace that is not slow to
mark such points. The people of Antioch, a very
talented city which especially honours the dance,
keep such an eye upon everything that is done and
said that nothing ever escapes a man of them. When

 

a diminutive dancer made his entrance and began
to play Hector, they all cried out in a single voice,
“Ho there, Astyanax! where is Hector?” On
another occasion, when a man who was extremely tall
undertook to dance Capaneus and assault the walls
of Thebes, “Step over the wall,” they said, “you
have no need of a ladder!” And in the case of the
plump and heavy dancer who tried to make great
leaps, they said, “We beg you, spare the stage!’
On the other hand, to one who was very thin they
called out: “Good health to you,” as if he were ill.
It is not for the joke’s sake that I have mentioned
these comments, but to let you see that entire
peoples have taken a great interest in the art of
dancing, so that they could regulate its good and
bad points.

In the next place, the dancer must by all means
be agile and at once loose-jointed and well-knit, so
as to bend like a withe as occasion arises and to be
stubbornly firm if that should be requisite.

That
dancing does not differ widely from the use of the
hands which figures in the public games—that it has
something in common with the noble sport of Hermes
and Pollux and Heracles, you may note by observing
each of its mimic portrayals. 

 
Herodotus says that what is apprehended through
the eyes is more trustworthy than hearing ; but
dancing possesses what appeals to ear and eye alike.

Its spell, too, is so potent that if a lover enters the
theatre, he is restored to his right mind by seeing all
the evil consequences of love; and one who is in the
clutch of grief Jeaves the theatre in brighter mood,


 

as if he had taken some potion that brings forgetfulness and, in the words of the poet, 
 
 surcease from
sorrow and anger 
 
 Odyssey, IV, 221. 
 .” An indication that each of
those who see it follows closely what is going on and
understands what is being presented lies in the fact
that the spectators often weep when anything sad
and pitiful reveals itself. And certainly the Bacchic
dance that is especially cultivated in Ionia and in
Pontus, although it is a satyr-show, nevertheless
has so enthralled the people of those countries that
when the appointed time comes round they each and
all forget everything else and sit the whole day
looking at titans, corybantes, satyrs, and rustics.
Indeed, these parts in the dance are performed by
the men of the best birth and first rank in every one
of their cities, not only without shame but with
greater pride in the thing than in family trees and
public services and ancestral distinctions.

Now that I have spoken of the strong points of
dancers, let me tell you also of their defects. Those
of the body, to be sure, I have already set forth;
those of the mind I think you will be able to note
with this explanation. Many of them, through
ignorance—for it is impossible that they should all
be clever—exhibit dreadful solecisms, so to speak,
in their dancing. Some of them make senseless
movements that have nothing to do with the harpstring, as the saying goes; for the foot says one
thing and the music another. Others suit their
movements to the music, but bring in their themes
too late or too soon, as in a case which I remember to
have seen one time. A dancer who was presenting
the birth of Zeus, with Cronus eating his children,

 

went off into presenting the misfortunes of Thyestes
because the similarity led him astray. And another,
trying to enact Semele stricken by the thunderbolt,
assimilated her to Glauce, who was of a later generation. But we should not condemn the dance itself,
I take it, or find fault with the activity itself on
account of such dancers; we should consider them
ignorant, as indeed they are, and should praise
those who do everything satisfactorily, in accordance
with the regulations and the rhythm of the art.

In general, the dancer should be perfect in every
point, so as to be wholly rhythmical, graceful, symmetrical, consistent, unexceptionable, impeccable,
not wanting in any way, blent of the highest qualities,
keen in his ideas, profound in his culture, and above
all, human in his sentiments. In fact, the praise that
he gets from the spectators will be consummate
when each of those who behold him recognises his
own traits, or rather sees in the dancer as in a
mirror his very self, with his customary feelings and
actions. Then people cannot contain themselves
for pleasure, and with one accord they burst into
applause, each seeing the reflection of his own soul
and recognising himself. Really, that Delphic
monition “Know thyself” realises itself in them
from the spectacle, and when they go away from the
theatre they have learned what they should choose
and what avoid, and have been taught what they
did not know before.

As in literature, so too in dancing what is generally
called “bad taste” comes in when they exceed the
due limit of mimicry and put forth greater effort
than they should; if something large requires to
be shown, they represent it as enormous; if something dainty, they make it extravagantly effeminate,
and they carry masculinity to the point of savagery
and bestiality.

Something of that sort, I remember, I once saw
done by a dancer who until then had been in high
esteem, as he was intelligent in every way and truly
worth admiring; but by some ill-luck, I know not
what, he wrecked his fortunes upon an ugly bit of
acting through exaggerated mimicry. _ In presenting
Ajax going mad immediately after his defeat, he so
overleaped himself that it might well have been
thought that instead of feigning madness he was
himself insane; for he tore the clothes of one of the
men that beat time with the iron shoe, and snatching
a flute from one of the accompanists, with a vigorous
blow he cracked the crown of Odysseus, who was
standing near and exulting in his victory; indeed, if
his watch-cap had not offered resistance and borne
the brunt of the blow, poor Odysseus would have
lost his life through falling in the way of a crazy
dancer. The pit, however, all went mad with Ajax,
leaping and shouting and flinging up their garments ;




 

for the riff-raff, the absolutely unenlightened, took
no thought for propriety and could not perceive
what was good or what was bad, but thought that
sort of thing consummate mimicry of the ailment,
while the politer sort understood, to be sure, and were
ashamed of what was going on, but instead of censuring the thing by silence, they themselves applauded
to cover the absurdity of the dancing, although
they perceived clearly that what went on came from
the madness of the actor, not that of Ajax. For, not
content with all this, our hero did something else that
was far more laughable. Coming down among the
public, he seated himself among the senators,
between two ex-consuls, who were very much afraid
that he would seize one of them and drub him, taking
him for a wether! 

 
The thing caused some to marvel, some to laugh,
and some to suspect that perhaps in consequence of
his overdone mimicry he had fallen into the real
ailment.

Moreover, the man himself, they say,
once he had returned to his sober senses, was so
sorry for what he had done that he really became
ill through distress and in all truth was given up
for mad. Indeed, he himself showed his repentance
clearly, for when his supporters asked him to dance
Ajax for them once more, begging to be excused,
he said to the audience, “For an actor, it is enough
to have gone mad once!” What irked him most
was that his antagonist and rival, when cast for Ajax
in the same role, enacted his madness so discreetly


 

and sanely as to win praise, since he kept within the
bounds of the dance and did not debauch the histrionic art.

These, my friend, are but a few out of manifold
achievements and activities of the dance, and I have
given you a glimpse of them in order that you may
not be highly displeased with me for viewing them
with ardent eyes. If you should care to join me in
looking on, I know very well that you will be wholly
enthralled and will even catch the dancer-craze. So
I shall not need to say to you what Circe said:

 
 
 Wonder holds me to see that you drained this
draught unenchanted. 
 
 Odyssey, X, 326. 
 

For you will be enchanted, and by Zeus it will not
be any donkey’s head or pig’s heart that you will
have, but your mind will be more firmly established
and you will be so enraptured that you will not give
even a tiny bit of the brew to anyone else to drink.
Homer says, you know, of the golden wand of Hermes
that he “charmeth the eyes of men” with it,

 
 
 Whomsoever he wishes, and others he wakes
that are sleeping. 
 
 Odyss., V, 47-48. 
 


Really, dancing does just that: it charms the eyes
and makes them wide awake, and it rouses the
mind to respond to every detail of its performances.
 
 CRATO 
Upon my word, Lycinus, I have come to the point
of believing you and am all agog, ear and eye alike.
Do remember, my friend, when you go to the theatre,
to reserve me a seat at your side, in order that you
may not be the only one to come back to us wiser!