APPEALS to foreign judicatures first came in request
					among the Grecians out of their distrust of one another’s
					justice, they deeming it as requisite to fetch justice from
					abroad, as any other necessary commodity which was not
					of their own growth. And is it not even so that philosophers, by reason of dissensions amongst themselves, have
					in the decision of some questions appealed to the nature
					of irrational beings, as to a strange city, and have submitted the final determination of such questions to the affections or to the dispositions of brutes, as being unbiassed and
					not corrupted by bribes? Or else this is the general complaint of human frailty, that while we differ about the
					most necessary and the greatest things, we consult horses,
					dogs, and birds, how we should marry, beget children, and
					bring them up; and, as if the evidence of Nature in ourselves were not to be trusted, we appeal to the dispositions
					and affections of brute beasts, and testify against the manifold transgressions of our own lives, intimating how at
					the very first and in the first things we are confounded and
					disturbed. For Nature conserves the propriety in them
					pure, unmixed, and simple; but in men, the mixture of
					ascititious opinions and judgments (as oil is served by the
					druggists) alters the properties, and does not preserve what
					is their peculiar. Nor need we wonder if irrational animals
					
					 
					
					 follow Nature more than rational; for plants do it
					more than animals, for they have neither imagination nor
					passion for what is not according to Nature, but are bound
					in chains, and ever go that one way that Nature leads
					them. Brutes do little regard gentleness, wit, or liberty;
					they have indeed the use of irrational incitements and appetites, which put them upon wandering and running
					about,—but seldom far, for they seem to lie at the anchor
					of Nature, who guides them in the right way (as it were)
					by bit and bridle. But reason, the lord and master in man,
					finds sometimes one turning, sometimes another; but in all
					its wanderings leaves no mark or footstep of Nature.

But in brutes observe how all things are accommodated to Nature. As to marriages, they tarry not till laws
					are passed against celibacy and late marriages, as Lycurgus
					and Solon’s citizens did; they matter not the disgrace of
					wanting children; nor are they ambitious of the honor of
					having three children, as many Romans, who marry and
					get children, not that they may have heirs, but that they
					may get estates. Again, the male accompanies with the
					female not at all times, because not pleasure but procreation is his end. Therefore in the spring time, when the
					fruitful breezes blow and the air is of a pregnant temper,
					then the female approaches the male, gentle and desirable,
					wantoning in the sweet smell and peculiar ornament of
					her body, full of dew and pure grass; and when she perceives she has conceived, she modestly departs, and provides for her bringing forth and for the safety of what she
					shall be delivered of. What brutes do cannot be sufficiently
					expressed; in all of them their affection to their young is
					evident by their providence, patience, and continence. Indeed we call the bee wise, and we celebrate her who deviseth the yellow honey, flattering her for glutting us with
					her sweetness; but the wisdom and art of other creatures,
					about their bringing forth and the rearing their young, we
					
					 
					
					wholly neglect. For instance, first, the king-fisher, when
					she has conceived, makes her nest of the prickles of the
					sea-needle, weaving them one among another, in form of a
					long oval fishing-net; then she puts it under the dashing
					of the waters, that being by degrees beaten upon and
					milled, it may acquire a smooth surface, and become so
					solid that it cannot easily be divided by either stone or iron.
					And what is more wonderful, the mouth of the nest is so
					exactly fitted to the king-fisher, that neither a greater nor
					a less animal can enter it; and when she is in (as they
					say) it will not admit the sea-water. The sea-fish called
					 γαλεοί give birth to their young within themselves, let them
					go abroad to feed, and then take them into their bellies
					again when they go to sleep. The bear, a most fierce and
					ugly beast, brings forth her young shapeless and without
					limbs, but with her tongue, as with a tool, she shapes the
					members; so that she seems not only to bring forth but to
					work out her young. And Homer’s lioness,—
					
					 
 
 Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
					 
 With many a step the lioness surrounds
					 
 Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
					 
 Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
					 
 Dark o’er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lowers; 
 
 
 
 
 does she not, I say, look as if she were contriving how to
						make a bargain with the huntsman for her whelps? For
						generally the love of their young makes bold creatures
						timorous, the slothful industrious, and the voracious parsimonious. So Homer’s bird gives to her young, though
							with herself it go hard. 
 She feeds them by starving
						herself, and when she has taken up her food, she lays it
						down again, and keeps it down with her bill, lest she
						should swallow it unawares. In like manner,
						
						 
 
 For tender whelps, when strangers come in sight,
						 
 The barking bitch prepares herself to fight; 
 
 
 
 
 
 and fear for her young turns into a second passion. When
						partridges and their young are pursued, the old suffer the
						young to fly away before, so contriving it that the fowler
						may think to catch them. Thus they hover about, run
						forward a little, then turn again, and so detain the fowler
						till their young are safe. We daily behold hens, how they
						cherish their chickens, taking some of them under their
						spread wings, suffering others of them to run upon their
						backs, and taking them in again, with a voice expressing
						kindness and joy. When themselves are concerned, they fly
						from dogs and serpents; but to defend their chickens, they
						will venture beyond their strength and fight. 
 And shall we think that Nature has bred such affections
						in these creatures, because she is solicitous for the propagation of hens, dogs, and bears, and not that she may by
						these means make us ashamed? Certainly we must conclude that these creatures, following the duct of nature,
						are for our example, and that they much upbraid the remorselessness of humanity, of which human nature alone
						is culpable, in not being capable of gratuitous love, nor
						knowing how to be a friend without profit. Well therefore might the comedian be admired who said, For reward
						only man loves man. Epicurus thinks that after this manner children are beloved of their parents, and parents of
						their children. But if the benefit of speech were allowed
						to brutes, and if horses, cows, dogs, and birds were brought
						upon the stage, and the song were changed, and it were
						said that neither the bitch loved her whelps for gain, nor
						the mare her foal, nor fowls their chickens, but that they
						were all beloved gratis and by impulse of nature, then by
						the affection of all brutes this assertion would be approved
						as just and true. And is it not a shame, that the procreation of beasts, their birth, pains in birth, and their education, should be by nature and gratis, and yet for these
						things that man should require usury, rewards, and bribes?

This assertion, as to pure Nature, can never be true,
					nor ought it to be believed. For, as in wild plants, such
					as wild vines, figs, and olives, Nature has implanted the
					principles of cultivated fruit, though crude and imperfect;
					so she has endowed beasts with a love of their young,
					though imperfect and not attaining to justice, nor proceeding further than utility. But in man, whom she produced
					a rational and political being, inclining him to justice, law,
					religion, building of cities, and friendship, she hath placed
					the seed of those things that are generous, fair, and fruitful,—that is, the love of their children,—following the first
					principles which entered into the very constitution of their
					bodies. For terms and expressions are wanting to declare
					with what industry Nature—who is skilful, unerring, and
					not to be surpassed, and (as Erasistratus says) has nothing
					idle or frivolous—has contrived all things pertaining to
					the procreation of mankind; and modesty will not permit
					it. The making and economy of milk sufficiently speak
					her providence and care. In women what abundance of
					blood more than serves for necessary uses, which, through
					languidness and want of spirit, wanders about and disturbs
					the body; being at other times by Nature in monthly periods
					discharged by proper canals and passages, for the relief
					and purgation of the body, and to render the womb like a
					field fit for the plough and seed, and desirous of it at
					seasons. But when the womb has caught the seed, and it
					has taken root (for the navel as Democritus says, grows
					first, like an anchor to keep the foetus from fluctuating, or
					as a stay or footstalk to the child), then Nature stops the
					passages proper for monthly purgations, and keeps the
					superfluous blood after that for nourishment and to moisten
					the birth, which now begins to be formed and fashioned,
					and at the end of a set number of days increases so in the
					womb, that it must seek another place and other sort of
					food. Then Nature, more diligent than any husbandman,
					
					 
					
					deriving the blood to other uses, has as it were some subterranean
					fountains, which receive the affluent liquors;
					and they receive them not negligently nor without affection,
					but with a gentle heat and womanish softness they concoct,
					mollify, and alter them; for in this manner are the breasts
					internally affected and tempered. And milk is not poured
					out of them by pipes in a full stream; but the breasts,
					terminating in flesh that is pervious by small and insensible passages, do afford store of sweet and pleasant sucking to the infant’s mouth. But for all this, such and so
					many instruments for procreation, such preparation, so
					great industry and providence, were all to no purpose,
					unless Nature had inbred in the mothers a love and care
					of their offspring.
					
					 
 
 Than man more wretched naught takes breath,
					 
 Not th’ vilest thing that creeps on earth; 
 
 
 
 
 which infallibly holds good of infants new-born. For
						nothing can be beheld so imperfect, helpless, naked, shapeless, and nasty, as man is just at his birth; to whom alone
						almost Nature has denied a cleanly passage into the world;
						and as he is smeared with blood, and daubed with filth,
						more like to one killed than to one new-born, he could
						never be touched, taken in arms, kissed, or hugged by any
						one to whom Nature had not given an inbred affection for
						him. Therefore other animals have their dugs below their
						belly, which grow on woman above her breast, that she
						may the more conveniently kiss, embrace, and cherish her
						infant; because the end of bringing forth and rearing is
						not necessity but love.

For let us look back to ancient times, to those who
					first brought forth and who first saw a child born. Upon
					them certainly no law enjoined any necessity of rearing
					their offspring, nor could expectation of thanks oblige
					them to feed their infants, as if it were for usury. Nay,
					
					 
					
					rather, they were angry with their children, and long remembered the injuries they had received from them, as
					authors of so many dangers and of so much pain and travail
					to them.
					
					 
 
 As when keen darts the fierce Ilithyiae send;
					 
 the powers that cause the teeming matron’s throes,
					 
 Sad mothers of unutterable woes! 
 
 
 
 
 These verses, some say, were not written by Homer, but
						by some Homeress, who either had been or was then in
						travail, and felt the very pangs in her bowels. Yet the
						love implanted by Nature melts and sways the childbed
						woman. While she is still in a sweat and trembling for
						pain, she is not averse to her infant; but turns it to her,
						smiles on it, hugs and kisses it. Though she finds no true
						sweetness, nor yet profit, however, she sometimes rocks it
							in a warm cradle, sometimes she dances it in the cool air,
							turning one toil into another, resting neither night nor day. 
 
 For what reward or gain was all this? For as little
						then as now; for the hopes are uncertain and far off. He
						that plants a vine in the vernal equinox gathers grapes
						upon it in the autumnal. He that sows wheat at the setting of the Pleiades reaps it at their rising. Cows, mares,
						and birds bring forth young ready for use. Man’s
						education is laborious, his increase slow, his virtue lies at
						a distance; so that most parents die before their children
						show their virtue. Neocles never saw Themistocles’s victory at Salamis, nor Miltiades the valor of Cimon at Eurymedon; Xanthippus never heard Pericles pleading; nor
						Aristo Plato philosophizing; nor did the fathers of Euripides and Sophocles know the victories their sons won,
						though they heard them indeed stammering and learning
						to talk. It is the mishap of fathers to see the revelling,
						drinking, and love intrigues of their children; to which
						purpose that of Evenus is memorable,
						
						 
						
						 
 
 Terror or grief unto his father’s heart
						 
 A son must ever be. 
 
 
 
 And yet men find no end of rearing of children; they especially who have no need of them. For it is ridiculous
						to think that rich men, when they have children born to
						them, sacrifice and rejoice that they may have some to
						maintain and to bury them. Or is it perhaps that they
						bring up children for want of heirs, because, forsooth, men
						cannot be found to accept of another man’s estate? Sand,
							dust, and the feathers of all the birds in the world, are not
							so numerous as heirs are to other men’s estates. Danaus
						was the father of fifty daughters; but if he had wanted
						issue, he might have had many more heirs. The case is
						far otherwise with children; they make not acknowledgments nor curry favor nor pay their devotions, as expecting
						the inheritance of due. But you may hear strangers who
						hang about them that have no heirs, talking like the comedian:
						
						 
 
 O Demos, having after judgment bathed,
						 
 Drink, eat a morsel, take three oboli. 
 
 
 
 
 And what Euripides said,
						
						 
 
 ’Tis money that procures us friends to choose,
						 
 And mightiest power o’er all things that men use, 
 
 
 
 does not universally hold true, but of such only as have
						no children. To such the rich give banquets, such great
						men honor, and for such only lawyers plead gratis. A
							rich man who has no known heir can do great matters. 
						Many a man who has had a great number of friends and
						followers, as soon as he has had a child, has been divested
						of all his alliances and power. So that children do not
						augment a man’s power; but their whole power over their
						parents’ affection is due to Nature, and is shown no less
						in men than in beasts.

But this natural affection, like many other good qualities
					
					 
					
					 in men, may be choked and obscured by vices; as
					when a wild forest is sown with garden-seeds. Can we
					say that man loves not himself, because some hang themselves, others break their own necks, Oedipus put out his
					own eyes, and Hegesias, by his disputation, persuaded
					many of his auditors to pine themselves to death?
					
					 For fatal things in various shapes do walk. 
 
 
 But all these things are disease and craziness of mind,
						transporting a man out of his own nature; and in this
						men testify against themselves. For if a sow or a bitch
						kill the young they have brought forth, men look dejected,
						are disturbed, sacrifice to the Gods to avert the mischief,
						and do account it a miracle; because men know that Nature has implanted in all creatures the love of their young,
						so that they should feed them and not kill them. For as
						among metals gold, though mixed with much rubbish, will
						appear; so Nature, even in vicious deeds and affection, declares the love to posterity. For poor people do not rear
						their children, fearing that, if they should not be well educated, they would prove slavish, clownish, and destitute of all
						things commendable; since they cannot endure to entail
						poverty, which they look upon as the worst of all evils or
						diseases, upon their posterity.