Klotho Well, Klotho, my skiff here
has been ready and in prime sailing-trim this long time. I have baled it
out and set up the mast and bent
the sail and furnished every oar with
a thong. As far as I am concerned, there is nothing
to prevent our weighing anchor and setting sail.
But Hermes is late; he ought to have been here
long ago. The ferry-boat is empty of passengers,
as you see, though it might have made the passage
three times to-day already. It is almost evening
now, and we have not yet taken in a single obol.
I know what will happen next. Pluto will suspect me of having been lazy in the matter, and
all the while somebody else is to blame. But our
noble and distinguished conductor of the dead
has taken a draught of the earthly Lethe like
any one else, and forgotten to come back to us.
He is either wrestling with the lads, or playing
the cither, or making speeches to air his nonsense; or very probably the gentleman is even
stealing on the sly, for that, too, is one of his
accomplishments. So he gives himself superior
airs, and yet he is half one of us.

Klotho What, Charon? How do you know
that some pressage of business has not overtaken
him? Perhaps Zeus has had to use him more
than usual in matters above. He is his master,
too. 


 Charon Not so far as to have more than his
share of control over a common servant. Certainly we have never detained him when he ought
to go. But I know why it is. Down here there
is nothing but asphodel and funeral libations and
sacrificial cakes and offerings to the shades. All
the rest is gloom and mist and darkness. But
in heaven everything is radiant, and there is ambrosia in abundance, and no stint of nectar. So
I imagine it is pleasanter to linger among these
things. He flies from here as though he were
running away from a prison. But when it is time
to come down his pace is so leisurely and slow
that he hardly gets here at all.

Klotho Don't be angry any longer, Charon, for
here he is himself, quite near, you see, bringing us
a great many people and driving the crowd along
with his staff more as if they were a herd of
goats. But what is this? I see one in irons
among them, and another laughing, and one has
a leathern pouch slung about him and carries a
club in his hand. He looks fiercely about and
urges on the others. See, Hermes himself, too,
is dripping with perspiration and panting, and


 


his feet are covered with dust. He can hardly
breathe. What is the matter, Hermes? What is
your hurry?
It looks to us as if you were in
trouble. 


 Hermes It is all this wretch here, Klotho. He
ran away, and I chased him till I came near deserting the ship for to-day. 


 Klotho Who is he, and what did he want to
run away for? 


 Hermes That is easy to see-because he preferred to live. He is some king or despot, to
judge from his lamentations and the things he
mourns for. He says he has been deprived of
great happiness of some sort. 


 Klotho Then the poor fool tried to run away
because he thought he could come to life again
after the thread woven for him had already come
to an end?

Hermes Tried to run away, do you say? Yes,
and if my very good friend here, the one with the
club, had not helped me to capture him and put
him in irons, he would have got clean away from
us. For, from the moment Atropos handed him
over to me, the whole way along he has been resisting and struggling, and he would plant his
feet on the ground so that he was not exactly
easy to conduct. And sometimes he would fall
to supplication and prayer, begging me to let him
go for a little and promising great bribes. But


 



I, of course, did not loose him, for I saw he was
longing for the impossible. But when we had
come to the very entrance and I was giving the
customary inventory of the dead to Aiakos, and
he was reckoning them by the memorandum sent
to him by your sister, that confounded villain
managed somehow to give us the slip and get
off. Accordingly, there was one soul short by
the count, and Aiakos, raising his eyebrows, said,
"Don't use your thieving skill in all departments,
Hermes. Be satisfied with your tricks in heaven.
Dealings with the dead are exact, and can in no
way evade scrutiny. The memorandum, you see,
has 'one thousand and four' written on it, but
you come bringing me one too few, unless you
are prepared to say that Atropos has falsified her
accounts for you."
I blushed at this speech, and instantly remembered what had happened on the road, and when
I cast my eye about and saw this fellow nowhere
I perceived that he had run away, and gave chase
as hard as I could up the road to daylight. This
good soul here followed me of his own motion.
We ran like racers, and only caught him at Tain-
He was as near as that to getting away.

Klotho 
And we, Charon, were just accusing
Hermes of neglecting his duties! 


 Charon Well, what are we waiting for now?
Haven't we lost enough time already?


 


 Klotho You are right; let them embark. I
will take my note-book in my hand and sit by the
gangway, as usual; and as each one of them
comes aboard I will find out who he is and
whence he comes, and what sort of ath he died
by. Do you, Charon, receive them and stack
them together in lots; and you, Hermes, put
these new-born children aboard first. For how
could they answer any of my questions? 


 Hermes See, ferryman, there are three hundred of these for you, counting those that were
exposed. 


 Charon Dear me, that is a large bag. You
have brought us unripe dead. 


 Hermes Shall we put the unwept aboard next
to these, Klotho? 


 Klotho Do you mean the aged? Yes, do so.
Why should I trouble myself now to inquire into
such ancient history? All you who are over sixty
come forward at once. What is this? They do
not hear me, because their ears are stopped with
age. Probably you will have to lift these, too,
and ship them. 


 Hermes Here is another lot, lacking two of
four hundred. These are all soft and ripe, and
gathered in their prime. 


 Charon No, by Jove! they are all raisins already.

Klotho Bring on the wounded next to these,


 


 Hermes I will begin with you. Tell me by what
death you have come here; or, rather, I will examine you by reference to the documents. Eightyfour must have died in battle yesterday in Mysia,
among them Gobares, the son of Oxyartes. 


 Hermes They are here. 


 Klotho Seven cut their own throats for love,
and Theagenes the philosopher on account of
the courtesan from Megara. 


 Hermes These are at hand. 


 Klotho Where are the two who killed each
other fighting for the throne? 


 Hermes They are here. 


 Klotho And he who was murdered by his wife
and her lover? 


 Hermes Here he is, close by. 


 Klotho Now bring those from the law-courts;
I mean the impaled and the flogged to death.
And where are the sixteen who were killed by
robbers? 


 Hermes You see this lot are here, the wounded.
Shall I bring on the women en masse? 


 Klotho By all means; and the shipwrecked en
masse, for they died in the same way.
And as
for the fever patients, bring them all at once, too,
and Agathokles the doctor with them.

Where is the philosopher Kyniskos, who ought
to have died of eating Hecate's supper and the
purifiactory eggs and a raw polyp to top off with?


 


 Kyniskos I have been standing here at your
service for some time, my good Klotho. What
wrong have I done that you left me on earth so
long? You almost spun out your whole spindle
for me. However, I tried often to cut the thread
and come, but somehow or other it was not to be
broken. 


 Klotho I left you to be a guardian and physician of human errors. But come aboard, and
luck go with you! 


 Kyniskos By Heaven, no, unless we shall first
have shipped the fellow in fetters, for I am afraid
he will persuade you with his prayers.

Klotho Come, let me know who he is. 


 Hermes Megapenthes, son of Lakydes, a despot. 


 Klotho Come aboard. 


 Megapenthes Not for worlds, Madam Klotho.
Let me go up for a little while. Then I will
come to you by my own free-will at no one's
summons. 


 Klotho What is the reason you want to go? 


 Megapenthes Give me time to finish my house.
I left my dwelling behind half built. 


 Klotho Nonsense! Get in. 


 Megapenthes I do not ask for a long time, Fate.
Let me stay just this one day, to appear to my
wife and tell her something about my moneywhere I kept my great treasure hidden.


 


 Klotho It is fixed. You cannot do it. 


 Megapenthes Then will all that gold be lost? 


 Klotho Not at all; you may be at ease about
that. Your cousin Megakles will get hold of it. 


 Megapenthes Oh, what an affront! My enemy,
whom I was too easy-going to put to death before
me? 


 Klotho The same. He will survive you forty
years and something over, in possession of your
harem and your clothes and all your wealth. 


 Mcgapenthes It is unjust, Klotho, to assign my
property to my greatest enemies. 


 Klotho I suppose, my noble sir, that you did
not seize it when it belonged to Kydimachos,
murdering the man himself and then slaying his
children on their father's warm body? 


 Megapenthes But at present it was mine. 


 Klotho Well, your time of possession had run
out.

Megapenthes Listen, Klotho. There is something I should like to say to you in private without witnesses. You others step aside a moment.
If you will give me a chance to run away I
promise to give you this day a million dollars in
coin of the realm. 


 Klotho You are absurd. Can you not get gold
and dollars out of your head yet? 


 Megapenthes I will throw in the two bowls, if
you like, that I got when I killed Kleakritos.
kam


 


They weigh a hundred talents of unalloyed gold
apiece. 


 Klotho Drag him in, for apparently he will not
embark of his own will. 


 Megapenthes I call you people to witness that
my wall and my dockyards are unfinished. I
could have completed them if I had lived five
days longer. 


 Klotho Never mind. Some one else will build
them. 


 Megapenthes Anyhow, this one thing it is perfectly reasonable to ask for. 


 Klotho What is that? 


 Megapenthes To come to life long enough to
subdue the Persians, and impose taxes on the
Lydians, and raise a huge monument to myself,
inscribing on it how many great and warlike
deeds I did in my lifetime. 


 Klotho My man, this is not asking for a single
day any longer, but to spend about twenty years.

Megapenthes I am ready, moreover, to furnish
sureties for my quickness and my reappearance.
If you wish it, I will even provide you a substitute in my place in the person of my one beloved
son. 


 Klotho You wretch, him whom you have often
prayed you might leave behind you? 


 Megapenthes That used to be my prayer, but
now I see the better course.


 


 Klotho He, too, will join you soon, slain by
the new king.

Megapenthes Well, but do not refuse me this
thing at any rate, Fate. 


 Klotho What is it? 


 Megapenthes I wish to know what the course
of events will be after me. 


 Klotho You shall, for your knowledge will be
an added torment. Midas the slave will have
your wife; he has been her lover this long time. 


 Megapenthes The villain! It was by her persuasion that I gave him his freedom. 


 Klotho Your daughter will be counted among
the harem of the present monarch.
Your portraits and statues, which the city erected for you
in times past, will all be overturned, a laughingstock to the beholders. 


 Megapenthes Tell me, is not one of my friends
moved to anger by these acts? 


 Klotho Why, who was a friend to you? What
reason had any one to be? You know that all
of them, those who bowed before you and those
who extolled your every word and deed, acted
from fear or hope, being friendly to your office
and having an eye to the main chance. 


 Megapenthes And yet they used to pour out
their libations at the banquets, and pray with a
loud voice that many good things might befall me,
saying that every one of them was ready to die



 


in my stead if possible, and altogether they swore
by me. 


 Klotho Accordingly, it was after dining with
one of them that you died yesterday. For that
last cup that was handed to you sent you here. 


 Megapenthes That is why I tasted something
bitter! What was his object in doing it? 


 Klotho You ask too many questions when you
ought to be embarking.

Megapenthes There is one thing that chokes
me most of all, Klotho, and makes me long to
rise to the light again, if but for a moment. 


 Klotho What is this? It must be something
tremendous. 


 Megapenthes Karion, my slave, as soon as he
saw I was dead, came late in the evening into
the room where I was lying, without any trouble,
for no one was so much as watching by me, and
looked at me and said, "You wretched little
creature, you gave me a blow many a time when
I didn't deserve it." With these words he fell
to plucking out my hair and beating me to his
heart's content, and finally he spat upon me and
went off, saying, "Go to the devil!" I was aflame
with rage, but all the same I could not do anything to him, stiff and cold as I was. But if I
could get hold of him—

Klotho Stop your threats and come aboard.
It is time now for you to go to your trial.



 


 Megapenthes And who will venture to pass
judgment on a man of kingly rank? 


 Klotho No one will judge the king, but the
dead man must come before Rhadamanthos.
You will soon see him assigning his doom to
each with great justice and according to merit.
Don't waste any more time just now.

 


 Megapenthes Make me a private citizen, Fate, if
you will, a poor man, a slave instead of a king
as I was. Only let me come to life again! 


 Klotho Where is the man with the club? And
you, too, Hermes; drag him in by the foot, for he
would not come voluntarily. 

 Hermes Come with me, you runaway. Take
him, ferryman, and, to make him safe, dash it— 

 Charon All right. He shall be made fast to
the mast. 


 Megapenthes Assuredly I ought to be placed in
the seat of honor. 


 Klotho Why? 


 Magapenthes Because, by Heaven, I was a despot and had a body-guard of ten thousand men. 


 Kyniskos Then Karion was right to pluck out
the hair of such a mischievous creature. You will
rue your tyranny when you have tasted the club. 


 Megapenthes Will Kyniskos, then, dare to raise
his staff against me? Did I not almost crucify
you a day or two ago because you were too free
and rough and disrespectful?


 
 


 Kyniskos That is why you, too, will stay crucified against the mast.

Mikyllos Tell me, Klotho, do you take no account of me at all? Or because I am a poor
man, is that a reason why I ought to be the last
to embark, too? 


 Klotho And who are you? 


 Mikyllos Mikyllos the shoemaker. 


 Klotho And you object to lingering? Do you
not see what promises the tyrant makes on condition of being let off for a little while? I am
amazed, then, if you, too, are not pleased at the
delay. 


 Mikyllos Listen, best of Fates. I am not greatly cheered by such a boon as the Cyclops gave to
"Noman" in promising to eat him last. First
or last, the same teeth are waiting. Moreover, I
am not in the same plight as the rich. Our lives
are poles asunder, as they say. Now the despot
was considered happy while he lived. He was
feared and stared at by all. When he left behind him so much gold and silver and raiment,
so many horses and banquets and lovely boys
and beautiful women, it was natural that he
should take it ill and grieve at being dragged
from them. For the soul sticks to such things
as if it were somehow glued to them, and it is
loth to give them up without a struggle, because
it has clung to them so long. Or, rather, it is as


 



if they had come to be bound by fetters that cannot be broken. Of course if any one drags them
off by force they shriek and beg mercy; and
though they have a bold face for other things,
they show themselves cowards about this, the
road that leads to Hades. They turn back and
have a lovesick longing to see the things of daylight even if from afar, just as this fool here did,
trying to run away on the road and persecuting
you with entreaties here.

But I, because I had
nothing at stake in life, neither estates nor apartment houses nor gold nor furniture nor reputation nor portraits, naturally had my loins girt up;
and as soon as Atropos nodded to me I gladly
threw down my knife and my sole-for I had a
boot in my hand-and jumped up and followed
barefoot, not even waiting to wash off the stains.
from the leather. No, I rather led the way, looking ahead; for there was nothing behind that
turned my head or called me back. And, by
Zeus! I see already that everything is charming
down here; for in my opinion it is most delightful to have universal equality, and no one better
than his neighbor. I judge that debtors are not
dunned for their debts here nor taxes paid; and
most important of all, no one is frozen in winter
or falls ill or gets beaten by his betters. We poor
men laugh it is the rich who feel the pain and
bewail their case.

Klotho I have seen you laughing for some
time, Mikyllos. What was it chiefly that stirred
your mirth? 


 Mikyllos I will tell you, goddess of my greatest reverence. I lived near a despot on earth, so
that I saw pretty plainly all that went on in his
house, and he seemed to me then to be somehow
equal with the gods. For I counted him blessed
when I saw the bloom of his purple, the crowd
of his followers, the gold, the gemmed goblets,
the silver-footed couches. And, moreover, the
steam and savor of his dinner preparations used
to drive me wild, so that he seemed to me more
than mortal, thrice blessed, and almost handsomer
than other people, and taller by two feet! lifted
up as he was by fortune, dignified in his gait,
with head thrown back, inspiring awe in those he
met. But when he came to die, and had laid
aside his luxury like a garment, I saw all his absurdity; but still more I laughed at myself for
having admired such a wretch, judging of his
happiness from the steam of his kitchen, and
calling him blessed on the strength of the blood
of the shell-fish in the Laconic Sea.

And he was
not the only one. When I saw the money-lender
Griphon groaning with remorse because he had
not had the good of his money, but was dying
without a taste of it, leaving his property to the
spendthrift Rodochares-for he was next of kin


 



and chief legatee by law-I could not help laughing; most of all when I remembered how yellow
and dirty he always was, his brow full of care and
rich only with the fingers that counted his millions, gathering little by little what lucky Rodochares will send spinning presently.
But why do we not proceed now? We will
have the rest of our fun on the voyage watching
the others bemoan themselves. 


 Klotho Get in and let the ferryman draw up
the anchor.

Charon My friend, where are you going? The
skiff is full already. Wait here till to-morrow.
We will ferry you over early in the morning. 


 Mikyllos It is a crime, Charon, for you to
leave a dead man behind who is stale already. I
will indict you before Rhadamanthos for illegal
practices.
Alas, alack! they are off already, and I shall
be left here alone. But why not swim after
them? I am not afraid of giving out and
drowning, because I am dead already. Moreover, I have not even got the obol to pay the
ferryman. 


 Klotho What are you doing? Stay where you
are, Mikyllos. It is not permitted to cross in
that fashion. 


 Mikyllos And yet I may possibly get into port
before you do.


 


 Klotho Heaven forbid. Come up with him
and catch him. You, Hermes, help pull him in.

Charon Now, where shall he sit? Every seat
is full, as you see. 


 Hermes On the despot's shoulders, if you agree. 


 Klotho Happy thought, Hermes. 


 Charon Climb up, then, and set your foot on
the villain's neck; and a fair voyage to us! 


 Kyniskos Charon, it is fair to tell you the
truth from this moment. I should not have an
obol to pay you when I have got across, for I
have nothing but this wallet, which you see, and
this club. But if you want any baling done, I
am ready, or even to take an oar. You will have
no fault to find if only you give me a strong, wellbalanced oar. 


 Charon Row, then; for even that is payment
enough from you. 


 Kyniskos Is it, or must I start a boat-song to
give the time? 


 Charon By all means, if you know some sailor's
song. 


 Kyniskos I know a number; but see, these
others are wailing tearfully in opposition. They
will put us out in our singing.

First Dead Man Alas for my goods!
 

 Second Dead Man Alas for my fields!
 

 Third Dead Man Woe is me, what a house I
have left!


 



 

 Fourth Dead Man How many thousands my
heir will get to make ducks and drakes of!
 

 Fifth Dead Man Alas for my young children!
 

 Sixth Dead Man Who will gather
grapes from
the vines I planted for myself last year? 


 Hermes Mikyllos, do you make no lament?
It is impious for any one to cross without a tear. 


 Mikyllos Nonsense. I have nothing to lament
for on a prosperous voyage. 


 Hermes Still, just join a little in the groaning
for custom's sake. 


 Mikyllos I will make my moan, then, since
you think best, Hermes. Alas for my soles!
Alas for my old lasts! Woe is me for my rotten
sandals! Poor wretch, I shall never again go
without food from daybreak to nightfall! Never
again shall I stalk about in winter barefoot and
half naked, my teeth chattering with the cold!
Who, pray tell, will have my knife and my awl ? 


 Hermes You have mourned enough; we have
almost finished our voyage.

Charon Come, pay me the ferry-charge first!
-Give me yours, too. Now they have all paid.
-Pay me your obol, too, Mikyllos. 


 Mikyllos You are joking, Charon, or else your
accounts are writ in water, as they say, if you expect any obol from Mikyllos. I absolutely do
not know whether an obol is four-sided or round. 


 Charon This is a fine, profitable voyage to-day!


 


However, take yourselves ashore. I am going
after the horses and cows and dogs and other
animals, for they, too, must needs cross now. 


 Klotho Take them and conduct them, Hermes. I myself must sail to the other shore, to
bring over Indopatris and Eraminthe, the Seres.
They are already dead just now from fighting
with each other about the boundaries of their
territories. 


 Hermes Let us proceed, friends, or, rather, all
follow me in order.

Mikyllos Goodness, how dark it is. Where
now is the handsome Megillos? Or how can any
one tell here whether Simmiche is more beautiful
than Phryne? All things are equal and of the
same complexion, and there are no such things
as degrees of beauty. Even my threadbare cloak,
which always used to seem hideous to me, is now
just as good as the king's purple, for they are
both invisible and covered by the same darkness.
Kyniskos, where may you happen to be? 


 Kyniskos Here I am. Let us stroll on together, if agreeable to you. 


 Mikyllos By all means.
Give me your arm.
Tell me, is not this much the same sort of thing
as the Eleusinian mysteries-for of course you
have been initiated? 


 Kyniskos You are right. See, now, this person
advancing with a torch, looking fiercely and


 



threateningly about her. I wonder whether it is
an Erinnys? 


 Mikyllos Probably, from the look of her dress.

Hermes Receive these people, Tisiphone-a
thousand and four. 


 Tisiphone Indeed, Rhadamanthos here has
been waiting for you a long time. 


 Rhadamanthos Bring them forward, Erinnys.
You, Hermes, officiate as herald and summon
them. 


 Kyniskos Rhadamanthos, in the name of your
father, produce me and examine me first. 


 Rhadamanthos Why? 


 Kyniskos I have a great desire to accuse some
one of the evil deeds I know he committed in
his lifetime, and my testimony would not be
worthy of credence unless it has first been shown
what my character is and how I passed my life. 


 Rhadamanthos And who are you? 


 Kyniskos Kyniskos, my good sir, of the philosophical persuasion. 


 Rhadamanthos Come here and stand your trial
first. Hermes, call for the accusers.

Hermes If any one accuses Kyniskos, the defendant, let him come forward. 


 Kyniskos No one comes. 


 Rhadamanthos But this is not enough, Kyniskos. Take off your clothes, so that I may judge
you by your brands.


 

 Kyniskos How should I be a branded slave? 


 Rhadamanthos Every evil deed that one of you
commits in his life brands invisible marks on his
soul. 


 Kyniskos Here I stand stripped, so look for
these brands you talk about. 


 Rhadamanthos He is spotless from head to
foot, except for these three or four blurred and
very indistinct brands. But what is this? Here
are the prints and traces of many burnings, but
they have been washed out somehow, or rather
cut out. What do these mean, Kyniskos, and
how is it that you look spotless again? 


 Kyniskos I will tell you. I used to be wicked
because I was ignorant, and won many a brand
by this means. But as soon as I began to take
to philosophy, I washed off, little by little, all the
stains from my soul, by the use of this so excellent and effectual medicine. 


 Rhadamanthos I dismiss you to the islands of
the blest, to the society of the noblest, after you
have accused the despot you mention.
Summon the others.

Mikyllos My case, too, Rhadamanthos, is a
trifling one, and calls for a short inquiry. I am
stripped for you already, so examine me. 


 Rhadamanthos Who may you be? 


 Mikyllos Mikyllos, the shoemaker. 


 Rhadamanthos Well done, Mikyllos; you are


 



perfectly spotless and unmarked. You, too, I
dismiss along with Kyniskos here. Now summon
the tyrants. 


 Hermes Let Megapenthes, son of Lakydes,
appear. Which way are you turning? Come
forward. I am summoning you, the despot.
Shove him out, Tisiphone, head-foremost into
the middle. 


 Rhadamanthos But you, Kyniskos, accuse him
now and expose him utterly, for the man is at
hand as defendant.

Kyniskos There is no need of words at all, for
you will very speedily know him for what he is
from his brands. However, I, too, will unveil
the man for you and exhibit him still more plainly
by what I say. The deeds this accursed wretch
committed while he was a private citizen I think
it best to omit; but when he banded himself
with the most daring spirits and collected a bodyguard, and, revolting, imposed himself on the
State as a tyrant, he slew thousands without trial,
and by taking possession of their property amassed
enormous wealth, and left no form of excess untried. No; he treated the wretched citizens with
every sort of insolence. He seduced the maidens,
debauched the young men, and bore himself in
every way offensively to his subjects. And you
could not even punish him adequately for his
suspicion, his vanity, and his overbearing manner


 


to those who happened in his way, for a man
would more easily have looked at the sun without
winking than at him. And who could describe
his inventiveness in the way of punishments to
gratify his cruelty? He did not keep his hands.
off even his next of kin. And you will know immediately that these things are not an empty
slander against him if you summon those that
were murdered by him. In fact, they are here
unbidden, as you see, crowding about him and
throttling him. All these, Rhadamanthos, died
by the wretch's hand. Some he plotted against
for the sake of their beautiful wives. Some gave
way to anger at his insolence when their sons
were led astray. Some died because they were
rich, and some because they were honest and
well-conducted, and in no way complacent of his
actions.

Rhadamanthos Enough already of witnesses!
But strip him of his purple, too, so that we may
know how many brand-marks he has. Dear me,
he is perfectly livid and covered with marks, or,
rather, he is black and blue with them. Now,
how should he be punished? Shall we cast him
into the fiery stream or hand him over to Kerberos? 


 Kyniskos Not at all, but, with your permission,
I will suggest a new and fitting punishment for
him.


 


 Rhadamanthos Speak; I shall be deeply grateful to you. 


 Kyniskos It is the custom, I believe, for all,
when they die, to drink of the water of Lethe. 


 Rhadamanthos Certainly. 


 Kyniskos Then let him alone of all men have
no taste of it?

Rhadamanthos Why? 


 Kyniskos In this way he will undergo the
worst punishment, remembering what he was and
what power he had on earth, and pondering on
his lost splendors. 


 Rhadamanthos You are right. Let him be
sentenced and carried off and bound along with
Tantalos, remembering the deeds he did while
he was alive.