MENIPPUS 
All hail, ye halls and portals of my home!
What joy you give mine eyes, to light returned ! 
A FRIEND
Isn’t this Menippus the Cynic? Assuredly nobody
else, unless I cannot see straight ; Menippus all over.
Then what is the meaning of that strange costume—
a felt cap, a lyre, and a lion’s skin? Anyhow, I must
go up to him. Good day, Menippus; where under
the sun have you come from? It is a long time since
you have shown yourself in the city.
 
 MENIPPUS 
I come from Dead Men’s Lair and Darkness Gate
Where Hades dwells, remote from other gods. 
 FRIEND 
Heracles! Did Menippus die without our knowing
it, and has he now come to life all over again?



 

 MENIPPUS 
Nay, I was living when I went to Hell. 
 FRIEND 
What reason had you for this novel and surprising
trip?
 
 MENIPPUS 
 Youth spurred me, and I had more pluck than
sense. 
 FRIEND 
My dear fellow, do stop your play-acting; come
off your blank-verse, and tell me in plain language
like mine what your costume is, and why you had
to go down below. Certainly it is not a pleasant
and attractive journey !
 
 MENIPPUS 

 
 Friend, ’twas necessity drew me below to the
kingdom of Hades, 
 There to obtain, from the spirit of Theban
Teiresias, counsel. 
 
 FRIEND 
Man, you are surely out of your mind, or you
would not recite verse in that way to your friends!
 
 MENIPPUS 
Don’t be surprised, my dear fellow. I have just
been in the company of Euripides and Homer, so
that somehow or other I have become filled with
poetry, and verses come unbidden to my lips.

But tell me, how are things going on earth, and
what are they doing in the city ?
 
 FRIEND 
Nothing new; just what they did before—stealing,
lying under oath, extorting usury, and weighing
pennies.
 
 MENIPPUS 
Poor wretches! They do not know what decisions
have been made of late in the lower world, and
what ordinances have been enacted against the rich;
by Cerberus, they cannot possibly evade them !
 
 FRIEND 
What is that? Has any radical legislation been
passed in the lower world affecting the upper?
 
 MENIPPUS 
Yes, by Zeus, a great deal; but it is not right to
publish it broadcast and expose their secrets. Someone might indict me for impiety in the court of
Rhadamanthus,
 
 FRIEND 
Oh, no, Menippus! In Heaven’s name don’t
withhold your story from a friend! You will be
telling a man who knows how to keep his mouth
shut, and who, moreover, has been initiated into
the mysteries,
 
 MENIPPUS 
It is a perilous demand that you are imposing
upon me, and one not wholly consistent with piety.
However, for your sake I must be bold. The
motion, then, was passed that these rich men with

 

great fortunes who keep their gold locked up as
closely as Danae
 
 FRIEND 
Don’t quote the motion, my dear fellow, before
telling me what I should be especially glad to hear
from you; that is to say, what was the purpose of
your going down, who was your guide for the
journey, and then, in due order, what you saw and
heard there; for it is to be expected, of course, that
as a man of taste you did not overlook anything
worth seeing or hearing.

MENIPPUS 
I must meet your wishes in that, too, for what
is a man to do when a friend constrains him?
First, then, I shall tell you about my decision—
what impelled me to go down. While I was a
boy, when I read in Homer and Hesiod about wars
and quarrels, not only of the demigods but of the
gods themselves, and besides about their amours and
assaults and abductions and lawsuits and banishing
fathers and marrying sisters, I thought that all these
things were right, and I felt an uncommon impulsion
toward them. But when I came of age, I found
that the laws contradicted the poets and forbade
adultery, quarrelling, and theft. So I was plunged
into great uncertainty, not knowing how to deal
with my own case; for the gods would never have
committed adultery and quarrelled with each other,
I thought, unless they deemed these actions right,
and the lawgivers would not recommend the opposite
course unless they supposed it to be advantageous.

Since I was in a dilemma, I resolved to go to the
men whom they call philosophers and put myself into
their hands, begging them to deal with me as they
would, and to show me a plain, solid path in life.
That was what I had in mind when I went to
them, but I was unconsciously struggling out of the
smoke, as the proverb goes, right into the fire! For
I found in the course of my investigation that among
these men in particular the ignorance and the perplexity was greater than elsewhere, so that they
speedily convinced me that the ordinary man’s way
of living is as good as gold.
For instance, one of them would recommend me
to take my pleasure always and to pursue that under
all circumstances, because that was happiness; but
another, on the contrary, would recommend me to
toil and moil always and to subdue my body, going
dirty and unkempt, irritating everybody and calling
names; and to clinch his argument he was perpetually reciting those trite lines of Hesiod’s about
virtue, and talking of “sweat,” and the “climb to
the summit.” Another would urge me to despise
money and think it a matter of indifference whether
one has it or not, while someone else, on the contrary, would demonstrate that even wealth was
good. As to the universe, what is the use of talking
about that? “Ideas,” “incorporealities,”’ “atoms,”
“voids,” and a multitude of such terms were dinned
into my ears by them every day until it made me
queasy. And the strangest thing was that when
they expressed the most contradictory of opinions,
each of them would produce very effective and
plausible arguments, so that when the selfsame
thing was called hot by one and cold by another,


 

it was impossible for me to controvert either of
them, though I knew right well that nothing could
ever be hot and cold at the same time. So in good
earnest I acted like a drowsy man, nodding now this
way and now that.

But there was something else, far more unreasonable than that. I found, upon observing these same
people, that their practice directly opposed their
preaching. For instance, I perceived that those who
recommended scorning money clove to it tooth and
nail, bickered about interest, taught for pay, and
underwent everything for the sake of money; and
that those who were for rejecting public opinion
aimed at that very thing not only in all that they
did, but in all that they said. Also that while
almost all of them inveighed against pleasure, they
privately devoted themselves to that alone.

Disappointed, therefore, in this expectation, I was
still more uncomfortable than before, although I consoled myself somewhat with the thought that if I
was still foolish and went about in ignorance of the
truth, at all events I had the company of many wise
men, widely renowned for intelligence. So one time,
while I lay awake over these problems, I resolved to
go to Babylon and address myself to one of the
Magi, the disciples and successors of Zoroaster, as
I had heard that with certain charms and ceremonials
they could open the gates of Hades, taking down in
safety anyone they would and guiding him back again.
Consequently I thought best to arrange with one of


 

these men for my going down, and then to call upon
Teiresias of Boeotia and find out from him in his
capacity of prophet and sage what the best life was,
the life that a man of sense would choose.
Well, springing to my feet, I made straight for
Babylon as fast as I could go. On my arrival I
conversed with one of the Chaldeans, a wise man of
miraculous skill, with grey hair and a very majestic
beard; his name was Mithrobarzanes. By dint of
supplications and entreaties, I secured his reluctant
consent to be my guide on the journey at whatever
price he would.

So the man took me in charge, and
first of all, for twenty-nine days, beginning with the
new moon, he took me down to the Euphrates in the
early morning, toward sunrise, and bathed me;
after which he would make a long address which I
could not follow very well, for like an incompetent
announeer at the games, he spoke rapidly and indistinctly. It is likely, however, that he was invoking
certain spirits. Anyhow, after the incantation he
would spit in my face thrice and then go back again
without looking at anyone whom he met. We ate
nuts, drank milk, mead, and the water of the
Choaspes, and slept out of doors on the grass.
When he considered the preliminary course of
dieting satisfactory, taking me to the Tigris river
at midnight he purged me, cleansed me, and consecrated me with torches and squills and many other
things, murmuring his incantation as he did so. Then
after he had becharmed me from head to foot and
walked all about me, that I might not be harmed
by the phantoms, he took me home again, just as

 

I was, walking backward. After that, we made
ready for the journey.

He himself put on a
magician’s gown very like the Median dress, and
speedily costumed me in these things which you
see—the cap, the lion’s skin, and the lyre besides ;
and he urged me, if anyone should ask my name,
not to say Menippus, but Heracles or Odysseus or
Orpheus.
 
 FRIEND 
What was his object in that, Menippus? I do
not understand the reason either for the costume
or for the names.
 
 MENIPPUS 
Why, that, at any rate, is obvious and not at all
shrouded in mystery. Since they had been before
us in going down to Hades alive, he thought that
if he should make me look like them, I might easily
slip by the frontier-guard of Aeacus and go in unhindered as something of an old acquaintance ; for
thanks to my costume they would speed me along
on my journey just as they do in the plays.

Well, day was just beginning to break when we
went down to the river and set about getting under
way. He had provided a boat, victims, mead, and
everything else that we should need for the ritual.
So we shipped all the stores, and at length ourselves

 
 
 Gloomily hied us aboard, with great tears falling
profusely. 
 
 Odyssey, 11, 5. 
 



 

For a space we drifted along in the river, and
then we sailed into the marsh and the lake in which
the Euphrates loses itself. After crossing this, we
came to a deserted, woody, sunless place. There
at last we landed with Mithrobarzanes leading the
way; we dug a pit, we slaughtered the sheep, and
we sprinkled their blood about it. Meanwhile the
magician held a burning torch and no longer
muttered in a low tone but shouted as loudly as
he could, invoking the spirits, one and all, at the
top of his lungs; also the Tormentors, the Furies,

 
 
 Hecate, queen of the night, and eery Persephoneia. 
 
 Source of the verse unknown. 
 

With these names he intermingled a number
of foreign-sounding, meaningless words of many
syllables.

In a trice the whole region began to quake,
the ground was rent asunder by the incantation,
barking of Cerberus was audible afar off, and
things took on a monstrously gloomy and sullen
look.

 
 
 Aye, deep down it affrighted the king of the
dead, Aidoneus— 
 
 Iliad, 20, 61. 
 


for by that time we could see almost everything—
the Lake, and the River of Burning Fire, and the
palace of Pluto. But in spite of it all, we went
down through the chasm, finding Rhadamanthus
almost dead of fright. Cerberus barked a bit, to be
sure, and stirred slightly, but when I hastily
touched my lyre he was at once bewitched by the
music. When we reached the lake, however, we
came near not getting across, for the ferry was
already crowded and full of groaning. Only


 

wounded men were aboard, one injured in the
leg, another in the head, and so on. They
were there, in my opinion, through some war
or other. 

 
However, when good old Charon saw the lion-skin
he thought that I was Heracles, so he took me in,
and not only ferried me across gladly but pointed
out the path for us when we went ashore.

Since we
were in the dark, Mithrobarzanes led the way and
I followed after, keeping hold of him, until we
reached a very large meadow overgrown with
asphodel, where the shades of the dead flitted
squeaking about us. Going ahead little by little,
we came to the court of Minos. As it chanced,
he himself was sitting on a lofty throne, while
beside him stood the Tormentors, the Furies, and
the Avengers. From one side a great number of
men were being led up in line, bound together
with a long chain; they were said to be adulterers,
procurers, tax-collectors, toadies, informers, and all
that crowd of people who create such confusion in
life. In a separate company the millionaires and
the money-lenders came up, pale, pot-bellied, and
gouty, each of them with a neck-iron and a
hundred-pound “crow” upon him. Standing by,
we looked at what was going on, and listened to
the pleas of the defendants, who were prosecuted
by speakers of a novel and surprising sort.



 

 FRIEND 
Who were they, in Heaven’s name? Don’t
hesitate to tell me that also.
 
 MENIPPUS 
You know these shadows that our bodies cast in
the sunshine ?
 
 FRIEND 
Why, to be sure!
 
 MENIPPUS 
Well, when we die, they prefer charges and give
evidence against us, exposing whatever we have
done in our lives; and they are considered very
trustworthy because they always keep us company
and never leave our bodies.

But to resume, Minos would examine each man
carefully and send him away to the Place of the
Wicked, to be punished in proportion to his crimes ;
and he dealt most harshly with those who were
swollen with pride of wealth and place, and almost
expected men to bow down and worship them; for
he resented their short-lived vainglory and superciliousness, and their failure to remember that they
themselves were mortal and had become possessed
of mortal goods. So, after stripping off all their
quondam splendour—wealth, I mean, and lineage
and sovereignty—they stood there naked, with
hanging heads, reviewing, point by point, their
happy life among us as if it had been adream. For
my part I was highly delighted to see that, and
whenever I recognized one of them, I would go up
and quietly remind him what he used to be in life
and how puffed up he had been then, when many men

 

stood at his portals in the early morning awaiting
his advent, hustled about and locked out by his
servants, while he himself, bursting upon their
vision at last in garments of purple or gold or gaudy
stripes, thought that he was conferring happiness
and bliss upon those who greeted him if he
proffered his right hand or his breast, to be covered
with kisses. They chafed, I assure you, as they
listened !

But to return to Minos, he gave one decision by
favour; for Dionysius of Sicily had been charged
with many dreadful and impious crimes by Dion as
prosecutor and the shadow as witness, but Aristippus
of Cyrene appeared—they hold him in honour, and
he has very great influence among the people of
the lower world—and when Dionysius was within
an ace of being chained up to the Chimera, he got
him let off from the punishment by saying that
many men of letters had found him obliging in
the matter of money.

Leaving the court reluctantly, we came to the
place of punishment, where in all truth, my friend,
there were many pitiful things to hear and to see.
The sound of scourges could be heard, and therewithal the wails of those roasting on the fire; there
were racks and pillories and wheels; Chimera tore
and Cerberus ravened. They were being punished
all together, kings, slaves, satraps, poor, rich, and
beggars, and all were sorry for their excesses. Some
of them we even recognized when we saw them, all


 

that were recently dead. But they covered their
faces and turned away, and if they so much as
cast a glance at us, it was thoroughly servile and
obsequious, even though they had been unimaginably
oppressive and haughty in life. Poor people, however, were getting only half as much torture and
resting at intervals before being punished again.
Moreover, I saw all that is told of in the legends—
Ixion, Sisyphus, Tantalus the Phrygian, who was
certainly in a bad way, and earthborn Tityus—
Heracles, how big he was! Indeed, he took up land
enough for a farm as he lay there!

After making our way past these people also, we
entered the Acherusian Plain, where we found the
demigods and the fair women and the whole crowd
of the dead, living by nations and by clans, some of
them ancient and mouldy, and, as Homer says,
“impalpable,” while others were still well preserved
and substantial, particularly the Egyptians, thanks
to the durability of their embalming process. It
was not at ail easy, though, to tell them apart, for
all, without exception, become precisely alike when
their bones are bare. However, with some difficulty
and by dint of long study we made them out. But
they were lying one atop of another, ill-defined,
unidentified, retaining no longer any trace of earthly
beauty. So, with many skeletons lying together,
all alike staring horridly and vacuously and baring




 

their teeth, I questioned myself how I could distinguish Thersites from handsome Nireus, or the
mendicant Irus from the King of the Phaeacians, or
the cook Pyrrhias from Agamemnon; for none of
their former means of identification abode with
them, but their bones were all alike, undefined,
unlabelled, and unable ever again to be distinguished
by anyone.

So as I looked at them it seemed to me that
human life is like a long pageant, and that all its
trappings are supplied and distributed by Fortune,
who arrays the participants in various costumes of
many colours. Taking one person, it may be, she
attires him royally, placing a tiara upon his head,
giving him body-guards, and encircling his brow
with the diadem; but upon another she puts the
costume of a slave. Again, she makes up one person
so that he is handsome, but causes another to be
ugly and ridiculous. I suppose that the show must
needs be diversified. And often, in the very middle
of the pageant, she exchanges the costumes of several
players; instead of allowing them to finish the
pageant in the parts that had been assigned to
them, she re-apparels them, forcing Croesus to
assume the dress of a slave and a captive, and shifting Maeandrius, who formerly paraded among the
servants, into the imperial habit of Polycrates. For
a brief space she lets them use their costumes, but
when the time of the pageant is over, each gives
back the properties and lays off the costume along
with his body, becoming what he was before his
birth, no different from his neighbour. Some, however, are so ungrateful that when Fortune appears
to them and asks her trappings back, they are vexed


 

and indignant, as if they were being robbed of their
own property, instead of giving back what they had
borrowed for a little time.
I suppose you have often seen these stage-folk
who act in tragedies, and according to the demands
of the plays become at one moment Creons, and
again Priams or Agamemnons; the very one, it may
be, who a short time ago assumed with great dignity
the part of Cecrops or of Erectheus soon appears as
a servant at the bidding of the poet. And when
at length the play comes to an end, each of them
strips off his gold-bespangled robe, lays aside his
mask, steps out of his buskins, and goes about in
poverty and humility, no longer styled Agamemnon,
son of Atreus, or Creon, son of Menoeceus, but Polus,
son of Charicles, of Sunium, or Satyrus, son of Theogiton, of Marathon. That is what human affairs are
like, it seemed to me as I looked.

FRIEND 
But tell me, Menippus; those who have such
expensive, high monuments on earth, and tombstones and statues and inscriptions—are they no
more highly honoured there than the common dead ?
 
 MENIPPUS 
Nonsense, man! If you had seen Mausolus himself—I mean the Carian, so famous for his monument
—I know right well that you would never have
stopped laughing, so humbly did he lie where he


 

was flung, in a cubby-hole, inconspicuous among the
rest of the plebeian dead, deriving, in my opinion,
only this much satisfaction from his monument, that
he was heavy laden with such a great weight resting
upon him. When Aeacus measures off the space
for each, my triend—and he gives at most not over
a foot—one must be content to lie in it, huddled
together to fit its compass. But you would have
laughed much more heartily, I think, if you had
seen our kings and satraps reduced to poverty there,
and either selling salt fish on account of their neediness or teaching the alphabet, and getting abused
and hit over the head by all comers, like the
meanest of slaves. In fact, when I saw Philip of
Macedon, I could not control my laughter. He was
pointed out to me in a corner, cobbling worn-out
sandals for pay! Many others, too, could be seen
begging at the cross-roads—your Xerxeses, I mean,
and Dariuses and Polycrateses.

FRIEND 
What you say about the kings is extraordinary
and almost incredible. But what was Socrates
doing, and Diogenes, and the rest of the wise men?
 
 MENIPPUS 
As to Socrates, there too he goes about crossquestioning everyone. His associates are Palamedes,
Odysseus, Nestor, and other talkative corpses. His
legs, I may say, were still puffed up and swollen
from his draught of poison. And good old Diogenes
lives with Sardanapalus the Assyrian, Midas the

 

Phrygian, and several other wealthy men. As he
hears them lamenting and reviewing their former
good-fortune, he laughs and rejoices; and often he
lies on his back and sings in a very harsh and unpleasant voice, drowning out their lamentations, so
that the gentlemen are annoyed and think of changing their lodgings because they cannot stand
Diogenes.

FRIEND 
Well, enough of this, but what was the motion
that in the beginning you said had been passed
against the rich?
 
 MENIPPUS 
Thanks for reminding me. Somehow or other,
in spite of my intention to speak about that, I went
very much astray in my talk.
During my stay there, the city fathers called a
public meeting to discuss matters of general interest ;
so when I saw many people running in the same
direction, I mingled with the dead and speedily
became one of the electors myself. Well, various
business was transacted, and at last that about the
rich. After many dreadful charges of violence and
mendacity and superciliousness and injustice had
been brought against them, at length one of the
demagogues rose and read the following motion.

(MOTION)
“Whereas many lawless deeds are done in life
by the rich, who plunder and oppress and in every
way humiliate the poor,

 

“Be it resolved by the senate and people, that
when they die their bodies be punished like those
of the other malefactors, but their souls be sent
back up into life and enter into donkeys until they
shall have passed two hundred and fifty thousand
years in the said condition, transmigrating from
donkey to donkey, bearing burdens, and being
driven by the poor; and that thereafter it be
permitted them to die.
“On motion of Scully Fitzbones of Corpsebury,
Cadavershire.”
After this motion had been read, the officials put
it to the vote, the majority indicated assent by the
usual sign, Brimo brayed and Cerberus howled. That
is the way in which their motions are enacted and
ratified.

Well, there you have what took place at the
meeting. For my part, I did what I came to do.
Going to Teiresias, I told him the whole story and
besought him to tell me what sort of life he considered the best. He laughed (he is a blind little
old gentleman, pale, with a piping voice) and said:
“My son, I know the reason for your perplexity ; it
came from the wise men, who are not consistent
with themselves. But it is not permissible to tell
you, for Rhadamanthus has forbidden it.” “Don’t
say that, gaffer,” said I. “Tell me, and don’t allow
me to go about in life blinder than you are.” So he
took me aside, and after he had led me a good way
apart from the others, he bent his head slightly
toward my ear and said: “The life of the common
sort is best, and you will act more wisely if you

 

stop speculating about heavenly bodies and discussing
final causes and first causes, spit your scorn at those
clever syllogisms, and counting all that sort of thing
nonsense, make it always your sole object to put
the present to good use and to hasten on your way,
laughing a great deal and taking nothing seriously.”

 
 
 So he spoke, and betook him again through the
asphodel meadow. 
 
 Apparently a cento from Homer ; cf. Odyssey, 11, 539.

As it was late by then, I said: “Come, Mithrobarzanes, why do we delay? Why not go back to
life again?” To this he replied: “Never fear,
Menippus; I will show you a quick and easy short
cut.” And then, taking me to a place murkier than
the rest of the region and pointing with his finger
to a dim and slender ray of light coming in as if
through a keyhole, a long way off, he said: “That
is the sanctuary of Trophonius, where the people
from Boeotia come down. So go up by that route
and you will be in Greece directly.” Delighted
with his words, I embraced the sorcerer, very
laboriously crawled up through the hole somehow,
and found myself in Lebadeia.