ARES My dear Hermes, have you heard Zeus’ threats?
How proud and preposterous they are! “If I
please”, says he, “I’ll let a cord
 
 down from
heaven; you’ll be hanging on it, trying with all your
might to pull me down, but you’ll be wasting all
your efforts, for you’ll never succeed. And, if
I choose to tug up, it won’t be only you, but I’ll pull
up the earth and the sea into the bargain, and leave
the lot dangling in mid-air.” He goes on and on
like that. You’ve heard it all too. I’ll admit that
he’s more than a match and too strong for any one
of us, but that he’s too much for all of us put
together, so that, even if we have the earth and the
sea with us, our weight wouldn’t overpower him—that
I’ll never believe.

HERMES Hush, Ares. It isn’t safe to talk like that, or we
may be sorry for our silly chatter. 

 ARES Do you think I’d have said that to just anyone,
or only to you? I knew you would hold your




 


tongue. But I must tell you what struck me as
most ridiculous as I listened to his threats. I remember,
just the other day, when Poseidon and Hera
and Athena rebelled,
 
 and were plotting to catch him
and clap him in irons, he was crazy with terror
though there were only three of them. And in
irons he would have been, thunder and lightning and
all, if Thetis had not been sorry for him, and called
in to his help Briareos with his hundred hands.
When I thought of that, I had to laugh at his fine talk. 

 HERMES Quiet, I tell you. It’s dangerous for you to talk
like that, and for me to listen.

PAN Good day to you, Hermes, Daddy mine. 

 HERMES And a bad day to you. But how am I your daddy? 

 PAN Aren’t you Hermes of Cyllene? 

 HERMES Yes. How, then, are you my son? 


 
 PAN I’m your bastard boy, your love-child. 

 HERMES Oh quite so, when some billy-goat, I suppose, led
a nanny astray! How could you be mine, you with
your horns and ugly snout and shaggy beard and a
goat’s cloven hooves and a tail over your behind? 

 PAN When you jeer at me, daddy, you’re mocking your
own son, or rather yourself for producing such
creatures as your children. It’s not my fault. 

 HERMES Who do you say your mother was? Perhaps
I led a nanny astray without knowing it. 

 PAN No, not a nanny. But try to remember if you
ever forced your attentions on a freeborn girl in
Arcadia. Why are you biting your nails and
thinking so hard? Why so puzzled? I’m speaking
of Icarius’ girl, Penelope.
 
 

 HERMES Then what possessed her to produce in you a child
not like me but like a goat?

PAN I’ll tell you what she said herself. When she was
packing me off to Arcadia, she said, “My boy, I,
Penelope, a true blue Spartan, am your mother, but
your father, let me tell you, is a god, Hermes, son
of Maia and Zeus. Don’t worry because you have
horns and a goat’s shanks, for when your father
came courting me, he made himself into a goat so
that no one would notice him. That’s why you’ve
turned out like the goat.” 

 HERMES Ah, yes. I do remember doing something like
that. Am I, then, to be called your father? I, who
am so proud of my good looks! I, who’ve still got a
smooth chin! Am I to be laughed at by all for
having such a bonny boy?

PAN But I won’t disgrace you, father. I’m a musician
and play the pipe loud and true. Dionysus is lost
without me, and has made me his companion and
fellow-reveller; I’m his dance-leader, and if you
could see how many flocks I have around Tegea and
on Parthenium, you’d be delighted. I’m lord and
master of all Arcadia. Besides that, the other day,
I fought so magnificently on the side of the Athenians
at Marathon that a prize of valour was chosen for
me—the cave under the Acropolis.
 
 Anyhow, go
to Athens and you’ll soon find out what a great name
Pan has there.

HERMES Tell me, are you married yet, Pan? Pan’s the
name they give you, isn’t it? 

 PAN Of course not, daddy. I’m romantically inclined,
and wouldn’t like to have to confine my attentions
to just one. 

 HERMES No doubt, then, you try your luck with the nanny-goats? 

 PAN A fine jest coming from you! My lady-friends
are Echo and Pitys and all the Maenads of Dionysus,
and I’m in great demand with them. 

 HERMES Please do me a favour, son. I’ve never asked
one from you before. 

 PAN Tell me what you want, daddy, and let me see
to it. 

 HERMES You may come here and pay your respects to me,
but please don’t call me daddy when anyone can hear.

APOLLO What can we make of it? Won’t we have to
admit that Eros and Hermaphroditus and Priapus,


 


though sons of the same mother, are utterly different
in appearance and habits? Eros is really handsome,
and an archer invested with great power, and
lord of all. Hermaphroditus is an effeminate pansy,
half one thing and half the other in appearance, for
you can’t tell whether he’s boy or girl; whereas
Priapus is quite indecently masculine. 

 DIONYSUS There’s no need to be surprised, Apollo. It’s not
Aphrodite’s fault, but the fathers were different.
 

Why, even when the father’s the same, the one
mother often has both boys and girls in her family.
Take for example your sister and yourself. 

 APOLLO Quite so, but we are alike and have the same
interests. We’re both archers. 

 DIONYSUS The same as far as the bow goes, Apollo, but no
farther, for Artemis kills visitors in Scythia, while
you are a prophet and healer of the sick. 

 APOLLO What? Do you think my sister likes her
Scythians? Why, the moment a Greek reaches
Taurica, she’s all ready and waiting to sail off with
him, in disgust at their human sacrifices.

DIONYSUS And the best thing she could do. But now as for
Priapus—I’ll tell you something really funny. The
other day—it was in Lampsacus—I was passing the
city, when he invited me home with him, and put
me up for the night. Now we’d gone to sleep in his
dining-room, after and were pretty well soaked, when
about midnight up gets our bold lad—but I’m
ashamed to tell you. 

 APOLLO And made an attempt on you, Dionysus? 

 DIONYSUS Something like that. 

 APOLLO How did you deal with the situation? 

 DIONYSUS What could I do but laugh? 

 APOLLO The best thing too, no bad temper or violence.
He’d some excuse for making an attempt on you.
You’re so good-looking. 

 DIONYSUS As far as that goes, he might make an attempt on
you too, Apollo. You’re so handsome and have
such a fine head of hair, that he might assault you,
even when he was sober. 

 APOLLO Oh no, he won’t. I have arrows as well as long
hair.

HERMES Is there a god in heaven, mother, more miserable
than I am? 

 MAIA Hermes, dear, you mustn’t talk like that. 

 HERMES Why shouldn’t I, when I’m so busy—and the only
one that does a hand’s turn, too—quite distracted
with so many different jobs? I must be up at
crack of dawn, and sweep the dining-room, seeing
to the cushions on the couch and tidying everything
up, and then be at Zeus’ beck and call, a courier to
carry his messages high and low, and the moment
I’m back, I’ve to lay out the ambrosia, without even
time for a wash; and before his latest acquisition,
thi nectar as well. But worst of all, it’s just
the same at night. I’m the only one that loses
hiss wine waiter, arrived, I used to pour out
the sleep, and must be busy then too—for Pluto, this
time, acting as guide of souls and usher of the dead,
and then be on duty with Justice Rhadamanthys.
My day’s work isn’t enough for me, it seems, on the
go in the wrestling schools, announcing in parliament,
and training speakers, but I’ve to help out
with the dead as well, for they all want their share
of me.

Yet Leda’s children
 
 can take turns at
being in heaven and Hades on alternate days, but I




 


must carry out all those jobs every day in both
places. Yes, and the sons of Alcmena and Semele,
 

whose mothers were only women, and came to a bad
end, can gorge themselves without a care in the
world, while I, the son of Maia, the daughter of Atlas,
must wait on them hand and foot. Now I’m just
back from Cadmus’ daughter at Sidon,
 
 where he
sent me to see how things were with her, and, without
giving me time to get my breath back, he’s sent me
off again to Argos to have a look at Danae, and
“Then”, says he, “you’d better go on from there to
Boeotia, and take a peep at Antiope on your way”.
But I’m quite fagged out already. If only it were
possible, I’d gladly have asked to be sold in the
market, like slaves on earth who find their lot too bad.
 
 

 MAIA Enough of that, my lad. You must do everything
your father wants. You’re still a youngster. Off
with you now to Argos, as you were told, and then
to Boeotia, or you may get a whipping for dawdling.
Lovers have sharp tempers.

PROMETHEUS Free me, Zeus. I’ve suffered terribly already. 


 
 ZEUS I’m to free you, am I? You ought to have had
heavier chains, and all of Caucasus on your head,
and a whole sixteen vultures to tear at your liver,
and dig your eyes out too, for making such creatures
as humans to plague us, and stealing fire and
producing women.
 
 For need I mention how you
tricked me in serving out the meat, by serving me
with hones wrapped in fat, and keeping the better
portion for yourself?
 
 

 PROMETHEUS Well, haven’t I already been punished enough for
that, nailed all this time to Caucasus, with that
accursed eagle feeding on my liver?

ZEUS That’s not the tiniest fraction of what you deserve. 

 PROMETHEUS But you shall have your reward for my freedom.
I’ll give you some very vital information, Zeus. 

 ZEUS You’re trying to trick me, Prometheus. 

 PROMETHEUS What good will that do me? You’ll still know
where Caucasus is, and still have plenty of chains
left, if I’m caught up to any tricks. 


 
 ZEUS Tell me first what is this vital reward I’ll have
from you? 

 PROMETHEUS Suppose I tell you what you’re after in your
present expedition, will you trust the rest of my
prophecies? 

 ZEUS Yes, indeed. 

 PROMETHEUS You’re off to Thetis, to make love to her. 

 ZEUS So far you’re right, but what’s to follow? For
I think what you say will prove true. 

 PROMETHEUS Have nothing to do with that daughter of Nereus,
for if she brings you a child,
 
 it will treat you just
as you treated— 

 ZEUS Do you mean that I’ll be cast out of my kingdom?
 
 

 PROMETHEUS I hope not, Zeus, but something of the sort
threatens if you tamper with her. 

 ZEUS Goodbye, then, to Thetis; and you, Prometheus,
must be released by Hephaestus for this.

EROS Even if I have done something wrong, Zeus, please
forgive me, for I’m only a child, and still without
sense. 

 ZEUS You a child, you Eros, who are far older than
Iapetus
 
 ! Just because you have no heard or grey
hairs, do you really think you should be considered
a babe in arms, you old villain? 

 EROS What great harm have I, old villain as you call me,
done you, that you even think of putting me in
chains? 

 ZEUS Curse you, do you think it no great harm when
you make such a fool of me that you’ve turned me
into everything under the sun—satyr, bull, shower
of gold, swan, eagle?
 
 Yet you’ve never made one
woman fall for me in my true colours, and, as far as
I know, I’ve not got you to thank for any of my
conquests, but I’ve to practise black magic to win
the ladies, hiding my true self. They’ve plenty of
affection for the bull or the swan, but if they see me
as I really am, they’re frightened to death.

EROS That’s only natural. The sight of your face is
too much for mortal women like them. 

 ZEUS How, then, is Apollo so popular with Branchus
and Hyacinthus? 

 EROS And yet even he had Daphne run from him, for
all his flowing locks and beardless face. But if you
want them to fall for you, you mustn’t go shaking
that shield of yours or carrying your thunderbolt
around with you, but make yourself as attractive as
you can and tender to behold. Let your hair grow
down in curls, do them up with a ribbon like Bacchus,
wear a purple robe and golden slippers, and come
dancing in to the music of pipes and timbrels, and
you’ll find you have more of them running after you
than all his Bacchantes put together. 

 ZEUS Be off with you. I’d rather they didn’t fall for
me, if I’ve to be like that. 

 EROS Then give up all ideas of romance, Zeus. That’s
a simple enough way out. 

 ZEUS Oh, no! I want my women, but I want success
with them without so much trouble. Promise me
just that, and I’ll let you go.

ZEUS Hermes, do you know Inachus’ daughter, the one
that’s so pretty? 

 HERMES Yes. You mean Io,
 
 don’t you? 

 ZEUS She’s not a girl, but a heifer now. 

 HERMES Wonders will never cease! How this change? 

 ZEUS Hera did it out of jealousy. But that’s not all.
She’s played another nasty unheard-of trick on the
poor girl. She’s put a herdsman called Argus with
ever so many eyes in charge of her. He keeps an
eye on her as she grazes, and he never goes to sleep. 

 HERMES Well, what are we to do about it? 

 ZEUS You must fly down to Nemea—Argus is on his
beat thereabouts—and kill him. Then take Io over
the sea to Egypt, and make her into Isis. Hereafter
let her be goddess of the folk there, raising the waters
of the Nile, sending them their winds, and preserving
seafarers from harm.

HERA Since you’ve brought this lad
 
 up here, Zeus, this
Phrygian you carried off from Ida, you’ve been
neglecting me. 

 ZEUS What, Hera? Jealous already? Of him too,
though he’s so simple and harmless? I thought
you were only down on my various lady friends.

HERA It’s bad enough and quite out of place for you, the
master of all gods, to desert me, your lawful wife,
and go down to earth, turning into gold or satyr or
bull, to commit adultery.
 
 But your women do stay
on the earth, but as for this boy from Ida, you
grabbed hold of him and flew him up here, my fine
king of the birds, and you’ve brought him into our
family over my head, “as wine-waiter”, you say.
Were you so badly in need of wine-waiters? Have
Hebe and Hephaestus, then, gone on strike? And
you can’t take the cup from him, without kissing
him first before all our eyes, and you find his kiss
sweeter than the nectar, and so you keep on and on
asking for a drink, even when you’re not thirsty.
Sometimes, too, you just take a sip, and give him





 


the cup, and when he has drunk, you take it back
and drain it, from the side he’s drunk from and
touched with his lips, so that you can be drinking
and kissing at the same time. And the other day,
you, the king and father of all, laid aside your aegis
and thunderbolt, and sat down playing dice with
him, you with that great beard on your face! I see
it all. Don’t think you’re hoodwinking me.

ZEUS And what’s so terrible, my dear, in kissing a pretty
boy like that while I’m drinking, and enjoying both
the kiss and the nectar? Why, if I let him kiss
you just once, you’ll never again blame me for
preferring his kiss to the nectar. 

 HERA Admirers of boys may talk like that, but I hope
I’ll never be so mad as to give my lips to that
Phrygian softie. Oh, the effeminate creature! 

 ZEUS Please don’t abuse my little darling, noble Hera.
This effeminate foreigner, this softie, is more delightful
and desirable to me than—I won’t say it, for fear
that I make you still angrier.

HERA Well, you can go ahead and marry him, for all I
care. But I hope you remember how you’re showering
tipsy abuse on me because of this wine-boy. 


 
 ZEUS What nonsense! I suppose we ought to have our
wine from your son, Hephaestus, hobbling about,
straight from the forge, still filthy from the sparks,
having just put down his tongs. I suppose I should
take the cup from those dirty fingers of his, and
between each mouthful of wine give him a kiss?
Why, even you, his own mother, wouldn’t want to
kiss his face, all black with soot. That would be
nicer, wouldn’t it? Hephaestus was a much more
suitable wine-waiter for the table of the gods, I
suppose, and Ganymede should be packed off home
to Ida? He’s too clean, and has rosy fingers, he’s not
clumsy when he offers the drink, and what annoys
you most of all, his kiss is sweeter than the nectar.

HERA Oh, so now you complain that Hephaestus is lame,
and his fingers aren’t good enough for your cup, and
he is all sooty, and that the sight of him turns your
stomach? You’ve been like that ever since Ida
produced this long-haired darling. In the old days,
you didn’t notice these things. The sparks and the
forge didn’t stop you from taking your wine from
him. 

 ZEUS You’re only making yourself miserable, my dear,
and me fonder of him, by being jealous. If you
don’t like taking your drink from a lovely boy, you
can have your own son serve you, and I’ll have you,
Ganymede, all to myself, waiting on me, and giving
me two kisses with each cup, one when you hold it


 


out to me full, and a second when I give you it back.
Hullo, not crying, are you? Don’t be afraid.
Anyone that chooses to hurt you will regret it.

HERA This Ixion, Zeus, what sort of a fellow do you
think he is? 

 ZEUS Why, an honest man, my dear, and grand company.
He wouldn’t be our guest, if he were unworthy
of our table. 

 HERA But he isn’t worthy, for his behaviour’s outrageous.
So don’t invite him again. 

 ZEUS How’s it been outrageous? I think I should be
in the know too. 

 HERA Of course you should. But I’m ashamed to
mention it. Such a thing to dare! 

 ZEUS But if he’s tried to do anything shameful, that’s all
the more reason for telling me about it. He’s not
been making attempts on anyone, has he? I think
I can guess the sort of shameful thing you wouldn’t
like to mention.

HERA It’s me he’s been after. Me of all people! And
for a long time too! At first I didn’t know what it
all meant, when he kept gazing hard at me. He
would sigh and whimper, and whenever I gave the
cup to Ganymede after drinking, he would ask for
a drink from the same cup, and when he got it,
would stop in the middle of his drink and kiss the
cup, bringing it up to his eyes, and staring at me
again. Presently I realised these were signs of love,
and for a long time I was ashamed to mention the
matter to you, thinking the man would get over his
madness. But now that he’s actually dared to
broach the subject with me, I’ve left him still
weeping and grovelling on the ground, and, stopping
up my ears so that I wouldn’t even hear his outrageous
pleas, I’ve come to tell you. I leave his
punishment in your own hands.

ZEUS The enterprising old devil! Supplanting me!
Aspiring to Hera’s affections! So drunk with the
nectar! Well, it’s our own fault; we’ve been far
too good to men, inviting them up to drink with us.
So you can’t blame them, when they’ve had the
same to drink as us, and seen the beauty of heaven’s
ladies, the like of which they never saw on earth, if
they fall in love and want such beauties for themselves.
After all, Love’s a pretty violent thing, and
gets the mastery not only of men, but sometimes
even of us gods. 

 HERA Love’s your master, good and proper. He drags
you along, pulling you by the nose, as they say, and


 


you follow wherever he leads you, and don’t mind
changing into anything he bids you. Why, you’re
nothing but love’s chattel and plaything. I can
see already that you sympathise with Ixion, because
you yourself once made free with his wife,
 
 and she
brought you Peirithous.

ZEUS What? Do you still remember every time I went
down to earth to have some fun? Do you know
what I think we should do with Ixion? We
shouldn’t punish him or forbid him our table. That
would be ill-bred. No, since he’s in love, and
reduced to tears and suffers intolerable torment— 

 HERA Quick, out with it; for I’m afraid you too will
make some outrageous suggestion. 

 ZEUS Nothing of the sort. No, let’s make a model of
you out of cloud, and every night after dinner, when
he can’t get to sleep for love, as is only natural, we
can bring it and put it beside him. Thus he could
be out of his misery, and imagine he’s got what he
longs for. 

 HERA Never! Curse him for lusting after what’s above
him. 

 ZEUS Still you must put up with it, my dear. What
harm will the model do you, if Ixion makes love to a
cloud?

HERA But I’ll be mistaken for the cloud and so be put
to shame, because we can’t be told apart. 

 ZEUS What nonsense! The cloud could never become
Hera or you a cloud. Ixion will be deceived, that’s
all. 

 HERA But humans are all so ill-bred. Perhaps he’ll
start boasting down on earth, telling his story to
everyone and claiming that he’s been keeping
company with Hera, and sharing Zeus’ bed; perhaps
he may even say I’m in love with him, and they’ll
believe him, not knowing he was with a cloud. 

 ZEUS Very well, if he says anything bike that, he’ll be
thrown down to Hades and tied to a wheel—he won’t
like that a bit—and carried round and round with
the wheel for ever, and suffer torment without end,
not as a punishment for his love—for that’s no
crime—but for boasting.

ZEUS Come now, Ganymede. We’ve got there, so you
can give me a kiss right away, and you’ll know I’ve


 


no crooked beak now, or sharp claws or wings, as
you thought when you took me for a bird. 

 GANYMEDE Mister man, weren’t you an eagle just now?
Didn’t you swoop down, and carry me away from
the middle of my flock? How, then, have your
feathers moulted? You look quite different now. 

 ZEUS It’s no man you see here, my lad, nor eagle either.
No, I’m the king of all the gods, but I’ve changed my
shape for the moment. 

 GANYMEDE What’s that? Are you Pan himself? How is
it, then, you’ve no pipe or horns or shaggy legs? 

 ZEUS Is he your only god? 

 GANYMEDE Yes, and we sacrifice one of our best billies to him,
taking it to the cave where he has his statue. But
you’re just a kidnapper, if you ask me.

ZEUS Tell me, have you never heard the name of Zeus?
Never seen his altar on Gargaron
 
 —the one who sends
rain, thunder and lightning? 


 
 GANYMEDE Oh, sir, do you mean you’re the one that poured
down that tremendous hailstorm on us the other
day, the one they say lives up top and makes all the
noise, the one my father sacrificed the ram to?
What harm have I done you, mister king of the gods,
that you’ve carried me off up here? Perhaps the
wolves will fall on my sheep now that they’re unprotected,
and tear them to pieces. 

 ZEUS What? Still worrying about your sheep?
You’re an immortal now and will be living up here
with us. 

 GANYMEDE What’s that? Won’t you be taking me back to Ida today? 

 ZEUS Of course not. That would mean I’d changed
from god to eagle all for nothing. 

 GANYMEDE Then my daddy will be looking everywhere for me
and getting cross if he doesn’t find me, and I’ll get a
thrashing by and by for leaving my flock. 

 ZEUS How so? Where will he see you? 

 GANYMEDE Please don’t go on with it, for I miss him already.
If only you take me back, I promise you you’ll get
another ram from him, sacrificed as my ransom. We
have the three-year-old one, the big one that leads
the way to the pasture.

ZEUS How simple the child is, how innocent he is!
Still just a child, that’s what he is. Look here,
Ganymede, you can say good-bye to all those things
and forget all about them—about your flock and
about Ida. You’re one of heaven’s company now,
and can do a lot of good to your father and country
from here. Instead of your cheese and milk, you’ll
have ambrosia to eat and nectar to drink, only you’ll
have to serve the nectar to the rest of us too with
your own fair hand. And most important of all,
you won’t be human any more, but immortal, and
I’ll make your own star—the prettiest one shining
in the sky—and you’ll enjoy perfect happiness. 

 GANYMEDE But what if I want to play? Who will play with
me? There were a lot of us who were of my age on Ida. 

 ZEUS You have someone to play with here too—there’s
Eros over there—and lots and lots of knucklebones
 

as well. Only you must cheer up and be a bit more
pleased with life, and stop longing for things below.

GANYMEDE But how could I possibly be any use to you?
Will I have to look after a flock here too? 

 ZEUS No, you’ll pour wine, and be in charge of the
nectar, looking after us at table. 

 

 GANYMEDE That’s quite simple. I know how to pour milk,
and hand round the milk bowl. 

 ZEUS There he goes again. Keeps harping on his milk!
Think’s he’ll be waiting on men! This is heaven,
let me tell you, and, as I said just now, our drink
is nectar. 

 GANYMEDE Is that nicer than milk, Zeus? 

 ZEUS You’ll know very soon, and once you’ve tasted it,
you won’t miss your milk any more. 

 GANYMEDE Where shall I sleep at night? With Eros, my
playmate? 

 ZEUS No, that’s why I carried you off up here; I wanted
us to sleep together. 

 GANYMEDE Can’t you sleep alone? Will you prefer sleeping
with me? 

 ZEUS Yes, when it’s with a beautiful boy like you.

GANYMEDE But how will you sleep better because of my
beauty? 

 ZEUS It’s sweet and soothing, and brings softer sleep. 

 GANYMEDE But Daddy would get annoyed with me when I
slept with him, and kept telling us first thing in the
morning how he couldn’t sleep for me tossing and
turning, kicking out and talking in my sleep; so he
usually sent me to sleep with mummy. So, if that’s
why you brought me up here, as you say it is, the
sooner you put me back down on earth again, the
better, or you’ll have a terrible time with sleepless
nights. For I’ll be an awful nuisance to you, tossing
and turning all night long. 

 ZEUS That’s just what I’ll like best—staying awake with
you, kissing and hugging you again and again. 

 GANYMEDE You can find out by yourself. I’ll go to sleep
and leave the kissing to you . 

 ZEUS We’ll find out how to manage, when the time
comes. Take him off now, Hermes, and let him
have a draught of immortality, and when you’ve
shown him how to offer the cup, bring him back to
serve our wine.

HEPHAESTUS Have you seen how bonny Maia’s newborn baby
 

is, Apollo, and what a nice smile it has for everyone?
You can see already it’ll be a real treasure. 

 APOLLO That baby a real treasure, Hephaestus? Why, it’s
already older than Iapetus
 
 when it comes to
mischief. 

 HEPHAESTUS What harm could it do? It was born only the
other day. 

 APOLLO Ask Poseidon—it stole his trident—or Ares—it
filched his sword out of his scabbard—not to
mention myself—it disarmed me of my bow and
arrows.

HEPHAESTUS What? That newborn infant, which can hardly
stand up, and is still in its baby-clothes? 

 APOLLO You’ll see for yourself, my dear fellow, if he gets
near you. 


 
 HEPHAESTUS But he’s already been near me. 

 APOLLO And what happened? Still got all your tools?
None gone? 

 HEPHAESTUS All present and correct, Apollo. 

 APOLLO All the same, have a really good look. 

 HEPHAESTUS Good heavens, I can’t see my tongs. 

 APOLLO No, you’ll see them in his baby-clothes. 

 HEPHAESTUS Can he have been practising stealing in his
mother’s womb, that he’s so light-fingered?

APOLLO Well, haven’t you heard him speaking? He
already has a glib and fluent tongue. And he
wants to be our message boy. And yesterday he
challenged Eros to wrestle with him, and in no time
at all took his feet from under him somehow and
had him on the ground. When they were still
congratulating him and Aphrodite gave him a hug
for winning, he stole her girdle, and, before Zeus
had stopped laughing, his sceptre into the bargain;
and if his thunderbolt hadn’t been too heavy and
scorching hot, he’d have had that too and nobody
any the wiser. 


 
 HEPHAESTUS The child’s too sharp for words, by your account. 

 APOLLO Yes, and he’s already shown he’s musical. 

 HEPHAESTUS How can you tell that?

APOLLO He picked up a dead tortoise somewhere, and
made himself a musical instrument out of it; he’s
fitted arms to it, with a yoke across, then driven in
pegs, fitted a bridge, and stretched seven strings
across; he plays a dainty melody with it, Hephaestus,
well in tune, so that even I am green with envy
for all my years of practice on the harp. Even at
night, Maia was telling me, he wouldn’t stay in
heaven, but would go all the way down to Hades out
of curiosity—to steal something from there, I’ve no
doubt. He has wings on his feet, and has had
someone make him a rod with marvellous powers,
and with it leads down the souls of the dead. 

 HEPHAESTUS I gave him that for a toy. 

 APOLLO Well, he’s paid you back for that good and proper—the tongs, you know. 

 HEPHAESTUS Thanks for reminding me. I’ll go and get them
back, if they’re to be found, as you say, in his
baby-clothes.

POSEIDON May I have a word with Zeus, Hermes? 

 HERMES Impossible, Poseidon. 

 POSEIDON Just tell him I’m here. 

 HERMES Don’t bother us, I tell you. It’s not convenient.
You can’t see him just now. 

 POSEIDON He’s not with Hera, is he? 

 HERMES No, it’s something quite different. 

 POSEIDON I know what you mean. He’s got Ganymede in
there. 

 HERMES No, it’s not that either. He’s poorly. 

 POSEIDON How come, Hermes? That’s surprising. 

 HERMES I’m ashamed to tell you; it’s so awful. 


 
 POSEIDON There’s nothing wrong with telling Uncle Poseidon. 

 HERMES He’s just had a baby, uncle. 

 POSEIDON Nonsense. How could he? Who’s the father?
Was he a man-woman, then, without us knowing?
His belly didn’t show he was pregnant. 

 HERMES True enough; the child wasn’t there. 

 POSEIDON Oh, I’ve got it. He produced it out of his head
again, just as he did Athena.
 
 He’s got a prolific
head. 

 HERMES No, it was from his thigh that Semele’s child
 

came. 

 POSEIDON Bravo! He’s a fine one for you. Gets pregnant
from head to toe. Breeds all over his body. But
who is Semele?

HERMES She’s from Thebes—one of Cadmus’ daughters.
He got her into trouble. 

 POSEIDON And then had the baby himself, instead of her? 


 
 HERMES Exactly, even if you do think it odd. The fact
is that Hera—you know how jealous she is—talked
Semele into persuading Zeus to visit her complete
with thunder and lightning. He agreed, and came
with his thunderbolt too; the roof caught fire, and
Semele was burnt up, and he told me to cut open
her womb, and bring him the half-formed seven-month
child. When I did so, he cut a slit in his own
thigh, and slipped it in to finish its growth there;
now, two months later, he’s brought it into the
world, and he’s ill from the birth-pains. 

 POSEIDON Then, where’s the baby now? 

 HERMES I took him to Nysa, and gave him to the Nymphs
to bring up. His name is Dionysus. 

 POSEIDON Is my brother, then, both father and mother of
Dionysus? 

 HERMES So it seems. But I’ll be off now to bring him
water for his wound, and give him the other attentions
usual after a confinement.

HEPHAESTUS What do you want me to do, Zeus? Here I am,
as you ordered, all ready with my axe at its sharpest,
even if I must chop through stones with a single
blow. 

 ZEUS That’s grand, Hephaestus. Now, down with it
on my head and cut it in two.
 
 

 HEPHAESTUS Are you trying to see if I’m mad? Tell me what
you really want me to do. 

 ZEUS You heard. I want my skull split. If you don’t
obey, I’ll be angry—and you know what that’s like
already.
 
 Hit away with all your might. Come on,
hurry up. The birth-pangs shooting through my
brain are killing me. 

 HEPHAESTUS Take care, Zeus, or I may hurt you. My axe is
sharp. You’ll find her a midwife that draws blood
and quite different from Ilithyia.
 
 


 
 ZEUS Hit away, Hephaestus. Don’t be afraid; I know
what’s good for me. 

 HEPHAESTUS All right, here goes. How can I help it, when it’s
your orders? Hullo, what’s this? A girl in
armour?
 
 That was no small trouble you had
in your head. No wonder you were short-tempered,
breeding a big girl like that in your brain—and her
with armour into the bargain. It wasn’t a head
you had but a barracks, though we didn’t know it.
She’s leaping up and down in a war-dance, shaking
her shield and poising her spear, full of the spirit of
battle; and, most wonderful of all, see how good-looking
and grown-up she’s become in this short
time; she’s got grey eyes, but they go very well
with her helmet. So, Zeus, pay me for my services
as midwife, by betrothing her to me this minute. 

 ZEUS That’s impossible. She’ll want to remain single
for ever, though for my part I’ve no objection to your
request. 

 HEPHAESTUS That’s all I wanted to hear. Leave the rest to
me. I’ll be off with her right away. 

 ZEUS Do so, if you can manage it, but I know that what
you want is impossible.

HERMES Zeus says you’re not to go out driving today, Mr.
Sun-god, or tomorrow or the next day. You’ve to
stay at home, and all that time’s to be one long
night; so the Hours
 
 can unyoke your horses, and
you can put out your fire and have a nice long rest. 

 HELIOS A strange message you’ve brought, Hermes.
Why, I’ve never heard the like of it! He doesn’t
think I’ve been going off my course and breaking
bounds, does he? He’s not annoyed with me, that
he’s decided to make the night three times as long
as the day? 

 HERMES Not a bit of it. This won’t go on for ever; but
for this once, it’s his personal wish that he should
get a longer night at this time. 

 HELIOS Where is he? Where were you sent from with
this message? 

 HERMES From Boeotia, Mr. Sun, from Amphitryon’s wife.
 

He’s been keeping company with her. He’s in love
with her. 


 
 HELIOS Isn’t one night enough, then? 

 HERMES Not at all. From this romance must come one
who is mighty and fit for many labours; so they
can’t do justice to him in a single night.

HELIOS Well, I hope he makes a success of the job, though
I must say, Hermes, this sort of thing didn’t happen
in Cronos ’ day. (It’s all right, we’re alone.) He 
would never sleep away from Rhea,
 
 or leave heaven
for a bed in Thebes, but day was day, and night
night, varying only within their proper limits with
the seasons of the year, with none of these strange
upheavals. No, Cronos would never have had
anything to do with a mortal woman. Now, however,
for some poor miserable woman, everything
must be turned topsy-turvy, my horses become stiff
for want of exercise, the road grows difficult, left untrodden
for three days on end, and men must spend
a miserable time in the dark. That’s what they’ll
get from Zeus’ love-affairs. Why, they’ll have to
sit waiting in darkness for hours, till he finishes his
job on the labouring fellow you’ve been telling me
about. 

 HERMES Quiet, Mr. Sun, or your words may get you into
trouble. I’ll be off now to the Moon and to Sleep,




 


and pass on Zeus’ instructions to them too, telling
her to take her time, and Sleep not to leave men, so
that they may not know the night’s been so long.

ZEUS Stop quarrelling, you two; you’re just like a
couple of men. It’s quite improper and out of place
at the table of the gods. 

 HERACLES But, Zeus, do you really mean this medicine man
to have a place above me? 

 ASCLEPIUS He does, by Zeus, for I’m your better. 

 HERACLES How, you crackbrain? Because Zeus blasted
you with his thunderbolt for your impious doings,
 

and you’ve now received immortality because he
relented and pitied you? 

 ASCLEPIUS You must have forgotten, Heracles, how you too
were scorched to death on Oeta,
 
 that you taunt me
with getting burned. 


 
 HERACLES That doesn’t mean our lives were the same. I’m
the son of Zeus, and performed all those labours
cleaning up the world, by overcoming monsters, and
punishing men of violence; but you’re just a herb-chopper
and quack, useful perhaps among suffering
humanity for administering potions, but without
one manly deed to show. 

 ASCLEPIUS Have you nothing to say of how I healed your
burns, when you came up half-scorched the other
day? Between the tunic and the fire after it, your
body was in a fine mess. Besides, if nothing else,
I was never a slave like you, carding wool in Lydia,
wearing purple, and being beaten with Omphale’s
 

golden sandal. What’s more, I never killed my
wife
 
 and children in a fit of spleen. 

 HERACLES If you don’t stop insulting me, you’ll pretty soon
find out that your immortality won’t help you much.
I’ll pick you up and throw you head first out of
heaven, so that you’ll crack your skull, and not even
Apollo the Healer will be able to do anything for
you. 

 ZEUS Stop it, I say; don’t disturb our dinner-party, or
I’ll send you both from the table. But it’s only





 


reasonable, Heracles, that Asclepius should have a
place above you, as he died before you.

HERMES Why so down in the mouth, Apollo? 

 APOLLO It’s my bad luck in love, Hermes. 

 HERMES Ah, yes, that could well make a chap sad. But
what’s your bad luck? Still sore about Daphne? 

 APOLLO Oh, no; I’m in mourning for my Laconian
darling, Oebalus’ son. 

 HERMES Is Hyacinthus dead then? 

 APOLLO He certainly is. 

 HERMES Who did it, Apollo? Who was so insensible to
charm as to kill that lovely boy? 

 APOLLO I did it with my own hand. 


 
 HERMES What! Were you mad, Apollo? 

 APOLLO No, it was an unlucky accident. 

 HERMES How? I’d like to hear how it happened.

APOLLO He was learning to throw the quoit, and I was
throwing it with him, when Zephyrus did it—curse
that wind above them all—Zephyrus, too, had been
in love with him for a long time, but the boy
wouldn’t look at him, and he couldn’t stand his
contempt. Well, I threw my quoit as usual, and
Zephyrus blew down from Taygetus, and dashed it
down on the boy’s head. Blood poured out where
it hit him, and he died on the spot, poor lad. I shot
back at Zephyrus with my arrows and chased him
hard, all the way back to the mountain. The boy
I’ve had buried in Amyclae, where he was struck
down by the discus, and I’ve made the earth send up
from his blood the sweetest and fairest flower of
them all, one which bears lettering
 
 of mourning for
the dead one. Do you think it’s unreasonable of me
to have a broken heart? 

 HERMES Yes I do, my good chap. You knew you’d
chosen a mortal to love; so you mustn’t be vexed
at his death.

HERMES To think, Apollo, that a poor cripple and mere
artisan like him has married the two fairest of the
fair, Aphrodite and Charis!
 
 

 APOLLO That’s just good luck, my dear fellow; but what
does surprise me is that they can stand living with
him, especially when they see him bathed in sweat,
bending over his furnace, with soot all over his face.
And yet they embrace a creature like that and kiss
him and sleep with him. 

 HERMES That annoys me too, and makes me jealous of
Hephaestus. You can show off your fine hair,
Apollo, and play on your harp, and be proud of your
beauty, and I of my fine physique and my lyre, but
when it comes to bedtime, we’ve got to sleep alone.

APOLLO I’m Generally unlucky in love; at least I lost my
two special sweethearts, Daphne and Hyacinthus.
Daphne so loathes and shuns me that she’s chosen
to turn into a tree rather than share my company,




 


and Hyacinthus was killed by that quoit. All that’s
left of them for me is wreaths. 

 HERMES And I once with Aphrodite—but I mustn’t boast. 

 APOLLO I know. They say she presented you with
Hermaphroditus. But tell me, if you can, why
Aphrodite and Charis are not jealous of each other.

HERMES Because, my dear fellow, Charis keeps company
with him in Lemnos, and Aphrodite in heaven.
Besides, Aphrodite is most wrapped up in Ares, and
in love with him, and so doesn’t trouble much about
this blacksmith fellow. 

 APOLLO Do you think Hephaestus knows of this? 

 HERMES Of course he does, but what can he do when
he sees Ares is such a fine strapping young fellow,
and a man of war? So he keeps quiet. But he’s
threatening to invent some sort of trap
 
 for them,
and to catch them in a net on the bed. 

 APOLLO That’s news to me; but I know I’d like to be
destined to fall into that trap myself.

HERA My dear Leto, the children
 
 you’ve given to Zeus
are beautiful too. 

 LETO My dear Hera, we can’t all have children like
Hephaestus. 

 HERA Cripple though he is, he’s certainly useful; he’s
an excellent craftsman, and has done a fine job of
work on our heaven; what’s more, he’s married
Aphrodite, and she thinks the world of him, but as
for your children—the girl’s far too much of a
tomboy and roamer of the mountains, and now, to
cap it all, she’s gone off to Scythia, and everyone
knows about her diet there, how she murders visitors
and eats them, just like the Scythian cannibals
 

themselves; while Apollo pretends to know everything,
be it archery, harping, medicine or prophecy,
and has set up prophecy factories in Delphi, Claros,
Colophon and Didyma, deceiving his customers by
giving crooked replies, hedging between two possible
answers, so that there’s no risk of a slip-up. He
gets rich in this way, for there are plenty of fools as
willing victims of his quackery. However, the more





 


intelligent people see through most of his mystery-mongering.
The prophet himself didn’t know he
was going to kill his darling
 
 with that quoit, and
didn’t foretell that Daphne would run away from
him, for all his beauty and fine hair. So I can’t see
why you thought you had better children than
Niobe.

LETO Anyway, I know how it vexes you to see my
children among the gods, murderer and false prophet
though you call them—particularly when they
praise my daughter for her beauty, and all admire
my son for his harp-playing at dinner. 

 HERA You make me laugh, Leto. Who could admire
one that Marsyas would have beaten at music and
skinned alive with his own hands, if the Muses had
chosen to judge fairly? But as it was, he was
tricked and wrongly lost the vote, poor fellow, and
had to die. And your pretty maid is so pretty that,
when she found out that Actaeon had seen her, she
was afraid the young fellow would tell everyone
how hideous she was, and set her hounds on him.
I won’t bother pointing out she could never have
been a midwife,
 
 if she were a virgin herself. 

 LETO Living with Zeus and sharing his throne has
swollen your head, Hera, and so you don’t mind




 


how you insult others. But it won’t be long before
I see you in tears again—the next time he leaves you
and goes down to earth as a bull or swan.

APHRODITE What’s this I hear you’re up to, Mistress Moon?
They say that every time you get over Caria, you
stop your team and gaze at Endymion sleeping out
of doors in hunter’s fashion, and sometimes even
leave your course and go down to him. 

 SELENE Ask your own son,
 
 Aphrodite; it’s his fault. 

 APHRODITE You needn’t tell me. He’s got a cheek right
enough. See what he’s done to me, his own mother.
First he brought me down to Ida after Anchises the
Trojan, and then to Mount Libanus after that
Assyrian lad
 
 ; and then he made Persephone fall in
love with the boy and robbed me of half my sweetheart.
So I’ve threatened him time and again, if
he doesn’t stop it, I’ll smash his archery set and
strip off his wings. Last time I even took my
sandal to his behind. But somehow or other,
though he’s scared for the moment and begs for





 


mercy, it’s not long before he’s forgotten all about
it.

But tell me, is Endymion good-looking? If so,
your plight is sorry indeed. 

 SELENE I think he’s very good-looking, Aphrodite, especially
when he sleeps with his cloak under him on
the rock, with his javelins just slipping out of his
left hand as he holds them, and his right hand bent
upwards round his head and framing his face makes
a charming picture, while he’s relaxed in sleep and
breathing in the sweetest way imaginable. Then I
creep down quietly on tip-toe, so as not to waken
him and give him a fright, and then—but you can
guess; there’s no need to tell you what happens
next. You must remember I’m dying of love.

APHRODITE Eros, my boy, you must watch what you’re about.
I don’t mean on earth, when you persuade men to
work against themselves or each other, but in heaven
too, when you make Zeus turn into shape after shape,
changing him into whatever you choose for the time,
and bring Lady Moon down from the sky, and
sometimes keep the Sun-god lingering at Clymene’s
side forgetful of his driving. You may go scot-free


 


for the liberties you take with me, your mother but
you’ve had the audacity even to turn the thoughts
of Rhea to love of boys and have her pining for
that Phrygian lad
 
 —at her time of life, too, and she
the mother of so many gods! Now you’ve driven
her mad, and she’s taken her team of lions and her
Corybants, who are just as mad as herself, and is
wandering up and down Ida; she keeps shrieking
for Attis, while the Corybants slash their arms with
swords, or let down their hair and rush madly over
the mountains, or blow on the horn, thunder on the
drums, or bang cymbals; it’s just chaotic frenzy all
over Ida. So I fear everything; yes, your mother’s
afraid of such goings on, for you’re just one big
nuisance, and I’m scared that one day Rhea, in a
fit of madness, or, more likely, when still in her right
mind, will tell her Corybants to catch you and tear
you to pieces or throw you to her lions. That’s
what I fear, when I see you running such risks.

EROS Don’t worry, mother; I’m quite used to the lions
already; I often get up on their backs, grab hold of
their manes and have a ride on them, and they make
a fuss of me, letting me put my hand in their mouths,
and licking it all over, and then let me take it out
again. But what time will Rhea have to devote to
me? She’s thinking of Attis the whole time.
Anyway, what harm do I do by showing what
beauty is like? It’s up to you to keep your hands
off things of beauty; so you shouldn’t blame me
for this. Or would you rather stop loving Ares and
have him stop loving you? 


 
 APHRODITE How smart you are. Got us all under your
thumb, haven’t you? But you’ll remember what
I’ve been saying one day.

APOLLO What’s the joke, Hermes? 

 HERMES It’s the funniest thing I ever saw, Apollo. 

 APOLLO Well tell me, so that I too can hear and share the
joke. 

 HERMES Aphrodite has been surprised with Ares, and
Hephaestus has caught them and tied them up.
 
 

 APOLLO How? It sounds as if you have a good story to tell. 

 HERMES He’d known about all this for a long time, and had
been out to catch them. He put invisible cords
round the bed, and went off to work at his furnace.
Then Ares crept in, unnoticed, as he thought, but
the Sun-god saw him and told Hephaestus. And
when they’d got on the bed, and were in the act, and
in his trap, the cords folded themselves round about




 


them, and Hephaestus put in an appearance.
Aphrodite, being in the nude, was most embarrassed
that she couldn’t hide her nakedness, while Ares
tried at first to escape, hoping to break the cords,
but later on, realising he was prisoner and couldn’t
escape, kept begging for mercy.

APOLLO And what’s happened? Has Hephaestus let him go? 

 HERMES Not yet, but he’s got all the gods together, and is
showing them the guilty pair. They’re lying there
bound together naked, hiding their faces and blushing,
and I must say I found it a most delightful
spectacle. Why, they’re almost in the act. 

 APOLLO Isn’t that blacksmith ashamed himself to put on
show this insult to his marriage? 

 HERMES Not a bit of it. He’s standing over them,
chortling. But I personally, if truth must be told,
envied Ares for having made a conquest of the
fairest of the goddesses, and even for being a fellow-prisoner with her. 

 APOLLO Do you mean you wouldn’t have minded being
tied up in such circumstances? 

 HERMES Would you, my dear fellow? Just come and
have a look. If you don’t make the same wish
when you’ve seen them, you’ll earn my praise.

HERA I’d be ashamed of such a son, if he were mine,
Zeus. He’s so effeminate, and such a degenerate
sot, putting ribbons in his hair, spending most of
his time with mad women, himself a bigger softie
than any of them, and dancing to drums, pipes and
cymbals. Indeed he’s like anyone but you his
father, Zeus. 

 ZEUS Yet, Hera, this wearer of females’ ribbons, this
“bigger softie than the women”, has subdued
Lydia and the inhabitants of Tmolus, and forced the
Thracians into subjection; he’s been on an expedition
against Indians with this army of women,
capturing their elephants and seizing their country,
and when their king dared to stand up to him for a
little, he took him prisoner and carried him off; and
while he was doing all this, he was dancing and
cavorting the whole time, and used nothing but
wands of ivy, drunk and possessed though you say
he was. And if any one dares to scoff at his rites and




 


insult him, punishes him by tying him up with vine-twigs *,
or makes the mans mother tear him to pieces
as though he were a fawn.
 
 Can’t you see in this
manly courage, worthy of his father? If these
activities are accompanied by fun and soft living,
why grudge him these things, especially if you
imagine what he would be like if sober, when he
can do this when tipsy?

HERA It sounds as if you’ll be all for his invention, too—I
mean the vine and its juice—though you see how
drunks behave, staggering about and turning to
violence, quite maddened by their drink. Take
Icarius
 
 , the first one to whom he gave the vine—he
was killed by his boon companions with
mattocks. 

 ZEUS That doesn’t get you anywhere. You can’t blame
wine or Dionysus for such things, but drinking to
excess, and swilling down neat wine beyond what’s
decent. But the man who drinks in moderation
will become more cheerful and better company, and
never treat any of his cronies as Icarius was treated.
I see what’s wrong with you, Hera; you’re still
jealous and haven’t forgotten Semele, judging by
the way you find fault with all that’s best in
Dionysus.

APHRODITE Why is it, Eros, that though you’ve triumphed
over all the other gods, Zeus, Poseidon, Apollo, Rhea
and myself, your mother, you make an exception of
Athena and keep clear of her, and for her your torch
has no fire, your quiver no arrows, and you no bow
or sense of aim? 

 EROS I’m afraid of her, mother. She scares me with
her flashing eyes, and she’s terribly like a man.
Why, when I string my bow and go after her, I get
terrified at the first shake of her crest, and start
trembling and dropping my arrows from my hands. 

 APHRODITE Well, didn’t you find Ares more frightening?
Yet you disarmed him and conquered him. 

 EROS No. He’s glad to welcome and encourage me,
but Athena always glowers at me. Once I just flew
past with my torch near her, and says she, “If you
come near me, as sure as I’m Zeus’ daughter, I’ll run
my spear through you, or catch you by the foot and
throw you into Tartarus, or I’ll tear you to bits with
my own hands and then”—she hurled many
threats like that at me. Besides she stares at me
so grimly and, oh, she’s got on her breast that
terrible face with the snaky hair—that’s what scares
me most of all. It gives me the creeps and makes
me run the moment I see it.

APHRODITE Do you mean to tell me you’re afraid of Athena
and her Gorgon, though you don’t fear the thunderbolt
of Zeus? But why do you leave the Muses
unwounded? Why are they safe from your arrows?
Do they too have tossing plumes and Gorgons on
display? 

 EROS I have respect for them, mother; they’re so
solemn, always with something to think about or
busy with their music; I often stand beside them,
bewitched by their melodies. 

 APHRODITE Never mind them, then, seeing that they’re so
solemn; but why don’t you wound Artemis? 

 EROS It’s quite impossible to catch her; she’s always
running away over the mountains. Besides, she’s
now got a love of her own. 

 APHRODITE And its object, my child? 

 EROS Hunting deer and fawn, chasing them and catching
them, or shooting them down; that’s all
she cares about. But that brother of hers, though
he’s an archer too and a long shot— 

 APHRODITE I know, my boy, you’ve hit him often enough
with your arrows.

ZEUS See what you’ve done, you confounded Titan!
You’ve destroyed everything on the earth by trusting
a foolish boy
 
 with your car. Some places
he’s scorched by driving close to the earth, and
elsewhere he’s frozen everything to death by taking
the heat right away, bringing chaos and confusion
on the whole wide world. Why, if I hadn’t realised
what was afoot, and brought him down with my
thunderbolt, there’d have been nothing left of
mankind. A pretty poor driver of the chariot you
sent us out—for all his good looks! 

 SUN It’s all my fault, Zeus, but don’t be angry with me
for giving in to my boy. He kept nagging at me to
let him. How could I have expected such trouble
to follow? 

 ZEUS Didn’t you know what a delicate operation it was,
how getting the least bit off course spoils everything?
Didn’t you know how the horses are full of
mettle and need a tight rein? Let it go slack, and
they take the bit in their teeth right away, as of
course they did with him, running away with him,
now to the left, and after a moment to the right, and
sometimes right back on their tracks, and up and
down, doing just what they liked, and he didn’t
know how to deal with them.

SUN I knew all that. That’s why I held out for a long
time and wouldn’t trust him to drive. But when
he started weeping and begging and imploring, and his
mother Clymene joined in, I planted him in the car
and told him how to stand, how long he was to climb
giving the horses their head, how long to descend
again, and how to be in control of the reins and keep
his mettlesome team in check. Yes, and I warned
him how dangerous it was not to drive straight, but
the poor boy, mounted on so great a fire and looking
down on yawning space, lost his nerve, and can you
wonder? Then the horses, sensing it wasn’t me in
the chariot, didn’t care two hoots for the lad and
left their course with these terrible results. He
dropped the reins—I suppose he was afraid of falling
out, and clung to the rail. But he’s already had
his punishment, Zeus, and my grief is punishment
enough for me. 

 ZEUS Punishment enough, you say, for such effrontery?
All right, I forgive you this time, but if ever again
you commit such an offence, or send out another
like him in your place, you’ll soon find out my
thunderbolt’s a lot hotter than your fire. The boy,
then, can be buried by his sisters beside the Eridanus,
where he fell after the spill. They can weep tears
of amber over him and become poplars in their
sorrow, and you’d better patch up your car—the
pole’s broken and one of the wheels is in smithereens—bring
up your horses and get on with your round.
And I hope you won’t forget all this in a hurry.

APOLLO Can you tell me, Hermes, which of these two is
Castor and which is Pollux? I can’t tell them
apart. 

 HERMES The one with us yesterday was Castor, this one is
Pollux. 

 APOLLO How can you tell? They look identical. 

 HERMES This one, Apollo, has on his face the marks of the
injuries he’s got from his opponents when boxing,
and especially from Bebryx, the son of Amycus,
 

when he sailed on that expedition with Jason. The
other has no marks like that; his face is free from
blemish. 

 APOLLO Thanks for telling me the difference, for all the
rest’s the same, the half egg-shell on the head, and
the star above it, the javelin in the hand, and a
white horse each; so I’ve often called Pollux Castor
and Castor Pollux. And there’s something else you
can tell me. Why don’t we see them together?
Why do they take turns of being dead and being a
god? 


 
 HERMES That’s because of their brotherly love. When
one of the sons of Leda had to die, and one to be
immortal, they shared out the immortality in this
way themselves. 

 APOLLO Not a very clever way of sharing it, was it,
Hermes? This way they won’t even see each other,
and that’s what they wanted most of all, I take it.
How can they, when one’s with the gods and one
with the dead? Another thing; I play the prophet,
Asclepius goes in for doctoring, you teach wrestling
and are an excellent trainer, Artemis is a mid-wife,
 

and everyone else among us has some special craft,
which helps gods or men. But what will we get
them to do? We can’t have big strapping fellows
like them sitting in idleness all day stuffing themselves. 

 HERMES You needn’t worry. They’ve been put on to
serving Poseidon; they must ride over
 
 the sea, and
anywhere they see sailors in a storm, they must
perch on the vessel and keep the crew safe. 

 APOLLO A useful vocation that, Hermes, and one of
salvation.