INTRODUCTION 
					 The essay on turning even one's enemies to some profitable use was an
						extempore address which was afterwards reduced to writing. It still retains,
						however, some of the marks of its extempore character in an occasional
						asyndeton or anacoluthon, in a few repetitions, and in such little slips as
						reversing the positions of Domitius and Scaurus (91 d). But minor matters of
						this sort cannot obscure the excellence of the essay as a whole, which
						contains much good advice, many wholesome truths, and much common sense. To
						cite but one example, the statement (91 b) that many things which are
						necessary in time of war, but bad under other conditions, acquire the
						sanction of custom and law, and cannot be easily abolished, even though the
						people are being injured by them, will appeal to everybody except the
						confirmed militarist. The essay was written some time after the essay
						entitled Advice to Statesmen, which in turn must be placed shortly after the
						death of Domitian (a.d. 96). 
					 This is one of the moral essays of Plutarch which
						so impressed Christians that they were translated into Syriac in the sixth
						or seventh centuries. The translation of this essay is rather an adaptation,
						many details being omitted as unessential, but even so it gives light on the
						Greek text in a few places. The Syriac translation is published in Studia
						Sinaitica, No. IV (London 1894)

I observe, my dear Cornelius Pulcher, that you
						have chosen the mildest form of official administration, in which you are as
						helpful as possible to the public interests while at the same time you show
						yourself to be very amiable in private to those who have audience with you.
						Now it may be possible to find a country, in which, as it is recorded of
							Crete, there are no wild animals, but a
						government which has not had to bear with envy or jealous rivalry or
						contention—emotions most productive of enmity—has not hitherto existed. For
						our very friendships, if nothing else, involve us in enmities. This is what
						the wise Chilon had in mind, when he asked the man who
						boasted that he had no enemy whether he had no friend either. Therefore it
						seems to me to be the duty of a statesman not only to have thoroughly
						investigated the subject of enemies in general, but also in his reading of
						Xenophon to have given more than passing
						attention to the remark that it is a trait of the man of sense to derive profit even from his enemies. Some
						thoughts, therefore, on this subject, which I recently had occasion to
						express, I have put together in practically the same words, and now send
						them to you, with the omission, so far as possible,
						of matter contained in my Advice to Statesmen, since I observe that you often have that book close at hand.

Primitive men were quite content if they could escape being injured by
						strange and fierce animals, and this was the aim and end of their struggles
						against the wild beasts ; but their successors, by learning, as they did,
						how to make use of them, now profit by them through using their flesh for
						food, their hair for clothing, their gall and colostrum as medicine, and
						their skins as armour, so that there is good reason to fear that, if the
						supply of wild beasts should fail man, his life would become bestial,
						helpless, and uncivilized. Since,
						then, it is enough for most people if they can avoid suffering ill-treatment
						at the hands of their enemies, and since Xenophon asserts that men of sense will even derive profit from those
						who are at variance with them, we must not refuse him credence, but rather
						try to discover the system and the art through which this admirable
						advantage is to be gained by those who find it impossible to live without an
						enemy. 
					 The farmer cannot domesticate every tree, nor can the huntsman tame every
						beast; and so they have sought to derive profit from these in ways to meet
						their other needs : the farmer from the trees that bear no fruit and the
						huntsman from the Wild animals. The water of the sea is unfit to drink and
						tastes vile ; yet fish thrive in it, and it is a medium for the dispatch and
						conveyance of travellers everywhere. The Satyr, at his first sight of fire,
						wished to kiss and embrace it, but Prometheus said, 
						 You, goat, will mourn your vanished beard, 
						 for fire burns him who touches it, yet it furnishes light and heat,
						and is an instrument of every craft for those who have learned to use it. So
						look at your enemy, and see whether, in spite of his being in most respects
						harmful and difficult to manage, he does not in some way or other afford you
						means of getting hold of him and of using him as you can use no one else,
						and so can be of profit to you. Many of the circumstances of life are
						unkindly and hateful and repellent to those who have to meet them ; yet you
						observe that some have employed their attacks of bodily illness for quiet
						resting, and trials which have fallen to the lot of many have but
						strengthened and trained them. Some, too, have made banishment and loss of
						property a means of leisure and philosophic study, as did Diogenes and Crates. And Zeno, on learning that the ship
						which bore his venture had been wrecked, exclaimed, A
							real kindness, O Fortune, that thou, too, dost join in driving us to the
							philosopher's cloak ! For just as those animals which have the
						strongest and soundest stomachs can eat and digest snakes and scorpions, and
						there are some even that derive nourishment from stones and shells (for they
						transmute such things by reason of the vigour and heat of their spirit),
						while fastidious and sickly persons are nauseated if they partake of bread
						and wine, so fools spoil even their friendships, while wise men are able to
						make a fitting use even of their enmities.

In the first place, then, it seems to me that the most harmful element in
						enmity may be made most profitable to those who give heed. What is this ?
						Your enemy, wide awake, is constantly lying in wait to take advantage of
						your actions, and seeking to gain some hold on you, keeping up a constant
						patrol about your life ; and not only does his sight, like the sight of
						Lynceus, penetrate the oak-tree and stones and tiles, but your enemy,
						through every friend and servant and acquaintance as well, so far as
						possible, plays the detective on your actions and digs his way into your
						plans and searches them through and through. Oftentimes we do not learn,
						until too late, of the illness or the death of our friends, so careless are
						we and neglectful; but our curiosity about our enemies all but prompts us to
						pry into their dreams ; sickness, debts, and conjugal disagreements are more
						likely to be unknown to the very persons affected than to their enemy.
						Especially does he try to get hold of their failings and ferret them out.
						And just as vultures are drawn to the smell of decomposed bodies, but have
						no power to discover those that are clean and healthy, so the infirmities,
						meannesses, and untoward experiences of life rouse the energies of the
						enemy, and it is such things as these that the malevolent pounce upon and
						seize and tear to pieces. Is this then profitable ? Assuredly it is, to have
						to live circumspectly, to give heed to one's self, and not to do or say
						anything carelessly or inconsiderately, but always to keep one's life
						unassailable as though under an exact regimen. For the circumspection which
						thus represses the emotions and keeps the reasoning power within bounds
						gives practice and purpose in living a life that is
						fair and free from reproach. For just as states which are chastened by
						border warfare and continual campaigning become well content with good order
						and a sound government, so persons who have been compelled on account of
						enmities to practise soberness of living, to guard against indolence and
						contemptuousness, and to let some good purpose prompt each act, are
						insensibly led by force of habit to make no mistakes, and are made orderly
						in their behaviour, even if reason co-operate but slightly. For when men
						keep always ready in mind the thought that Priam
							and Priam's sons would in truth have cause for rejoicing, 
						 it causes them to face about and turn aside and abandon such things
						as give their enemies occasion for rejoicing and derision. Furthermore, we
						observe that the Dionysiac artists often play their parts in the theatres in
						a listless, dispirited, and inaccurate way when they are by themselves ; but
						when there is rivalry and competition with another company, then they apply
						not only themselves but their instruments more attentively, picking their
						strings and tuning them and playing their flutes in more exact harmony. So
						the man who knows that his enemy is his competitor in life and repute is
						more heedful of himself, and more circumspect about his actions, and brings
						his life into a more thorough harmony. For it is a peculiar mark of vice,
						that we feel more ashamed of our faults before our enemies than before our
						friends. This is the ground of Nasica's remark, when some expressed their
						belief that the power of the Romans was now secure, inasmuch as the
						Carthaginians had been annihilated and the Achaeans
						reduced to subjection. Nay, he said, now is our position really dangerous, since we have
							left for ourselves none to make us either afraid or ashamed.

Moreover, as a supplement to this take the declaration of Diogenes, which is thoroughly
						philosophic and statesmanlike: How shall I defend
							myself against my enemy ? 
						 By proving yourself good and honourable. Men are
						much distressed when they see their enemies' horses winning renown or their
						dogs gaining approval. At the sight of a well-tilled field or a flourishing
						garden they groan. What, think you, would be their state of mind if you were
						to show yourself to be an honest, sensible man and a useful citizen, of high
						repute in speech, clean in actions, orderly in living, Reaping the deep-sown furrow of your mind From which
							all goodly counsels spring? 
						 Pindar 
						says, The vanquished are bound In the fetters of
							silence profound, not absolutely or universally, however, but
						only those who realize that they are outdone by their enemies in diligence,
						goodness, magnanimity, kindly deeds, and good works. These are the things
						which, as Demosthenes puts it, retard the tongue, stop the mouth, constrict the throat, and leave one
							with nothing to say. 
						 Be thou unlike the base ; this thou canst do. 
						 If you wish to distress the man who hates you, do not revile him as
						lewd, effeminate, licentious, vulgar, 
						 or illiberal, but be a man yourself, show
						self-control, be truthful, and treat with kindness and justice those who
						have to deal with you. And if you are led into reviling, remove yourself as
						far as possible from the things for which you revile him. Enter within the
						portals of your own soul, look about to see if there be any rottenness
						there, lest some vice lurking somewhere within whisper to you the words of
						the tragedian: Wouldst thou heal others, full of
							sores thyself ? 
						 If you call your enemy uneducated, strive to intensify in yourself
						the love of learning and industry ; if you call him a coward, rouse even
						more your selfreliance and manliness ; if you call him unchaste and
						licentious, obliterate from your soul whatever trace of devotion to pleasure
						may be lurking there unperceived. For there is nothing more disgraceful or
						painful than evil-speaking that recoils upon its author. So reflected light
						appears to be the more troublesome in cases of weak eyesight, and the same
						is true of censures that by the truth are brought back upon the very persons
						who are responsible for them. For as surely the north-east wind brings the clouds, so surely does a
						bad life bring revilings upon itself.

As often as Plato found himself in
						the company of persons whose conduct was unseemly, he was wont to say to
						himself, Is it possible that I am like them ? But
						if the man who reviles another's 
						 life will at once carefully inspect his own, and
						readjust it by directing and turning it aside into the opposite course, he
						will have gained something useful from this reviling, which, otherwise, not
						only gives the impression of being useless and inane, but is so in fact. 
					 Now most people laugh if a man who is bald or hump-backed reviles and jeers
						at others for being in such case ; for it is altogether ridiculous to
						indulge in reviling and jeering at anything that affords to another the
						opportunity for a caustic retort. For example, Leo of Byzantium, being reviled by a humpback
						for the weakness of his eyes, said, You reproach me
							with that which can happen to any man, while you bear on your back the
							mark of God's wrath! Do not therefore ever revile an adulterer when
						you yourself are given to unnatural lust, nor a profligate when you yourself
						are stingy. Own kin are you of her who slew her
							spouse are the words of Alcmeon to Adrastus. What then does
						Adrastus say ? He reproaches the speaker with a shameful deed which is not
						another's but all his own : But you yourself slew
							her who gave you birth. 
						 Domitius remarked to Crassus, Did you not
							weep at the death of a lamprey which was being kept for you
							in a fish-pond ? And the other replied, Did
							you not bury three wives and not shed a tear ? The man who is going
						to indulge in reviling need not be smart and loud-voiced and aggressive, but
						he must be irreproachable and unimpeachable. For upon nobody does the divine
						power seem so to enjoin the precept, Know thyself, as upon him who purposes to censure
						another, so that such persons may not, by saying what they want to say, have
						to hear what they do not want to hear. For a person of this type, as
						Sophocles puts it, By babbling thoughtless talk is wont to hear Against his will the words
							he willing speaks.

There may be, then, so much that is profitable and useful in reviling one's
						enemy; but no less profit lies in the alternative of being reviled oneself
						and ill spoken of by one's enemies. Hence Antisthenes 
						was quite right in saying that, as a matter of self-preservation, men have
						need of true friends or else of ardent enemies ; for the first by
						admonition, and the second by reviling, turn them from error. But since
						friendship's voice has nowadays become thin and weak when it comes to frank
						speaking, while its flattery is voluble and its admonition mute, we have to
						depend upon our enemies to hear the truth. For as Telephus, unable to find
						a suitable physician, subjected his wound to his enemy's spear, so those who
						are cut off from benevolent admonition must submit with patience to the
						remarks of a malevolent enemy if he exposes and reprehends their vice, and
						they must give consideration to the facts only, and not to what is in the
						mind of the detractor. Another parallel is the case of the man who, with
						intent to kill the Thessalian Prometheus, smote with his
						sword a tumour which Prometheus had, and opened it so that the man's life
							 was saved, and he obtained relief from his
						tumour through its bursting ; so oftentimes reviling launched upon a man by
						the prompting of anger or enmity cures some evil in his soul which either
						was not recognized or was disregarded by him. But most persons on being
						reviled do not stop to think whether the reproach is applicable to
						themselves, but they try to think what other form of reproach is applicable
						to the reviler, and, just as wrestlers do not wipe the dust from off their
						own bodies, so these persons do not wipe off the revilings from themselves,
						but they besmear one another, and in consequence get besmirched and begrimed
						by each other as they grapple together. But it is more imperative that the
						man who is ill spoken of by an enemy should rid himself of the attribute in
						question, than that he should get rid of a stain on his clothes to which his
						attention has been called ; and if anybody mentions things which are not
						really attributes of ours, we should nevertheless seek to learn the cause
						which has given rise to such slanderous assertions, and we must exercise
						vigilance, for fear that we unwittingly commit some error either
						approximating or resembling the one mentioned. For example, an unwarranted
						suspicion of unmanliness was aroused against Lacydes, king of the Argives,
						by a certain arrangement of his hair and a mincing gait, and Pompey suffered in the same way on account of his habit
						of scratching his head with one finger, although he was very far removed
						from effeminacy and licentiousness. Crassus incurred the
						charge of being too intimate with one of the Vestal virgins, when he only
						wanted to buy from her a piece of good land, and for this reason had many
						private interviews with her and paid her much
						attention. Again, Postumia's ready laughter and overbold talk in men's company put her
						under unjust suspicion, so that she was tried for unchastity. She was found
						innocent of the charge, but in dismissing her the Poritifex Maximus, Spurius
						Minucius, reminded her that the language she used should have no less
						dignity than her life. And again Pausanias inflicted on Themistocles, who
						was doing nothing wrong, the suspicion of treason by treating him as a
						friend, and by writing and sending messages to him continually.

Whenever, then, anything untrue has been said, you must not despise and
						disregard it just because it is false, but rather consider what word or act
						of yours, which of your pursuits or associations, has given colour to the
						calumny, and then be studiously careful to avoid it. For if others by
						becoming involved in undesired situations thereby learn a useful lesson—just
						as Merope says that Inconstant Fortune took from
							me, To pay her fee, the dearest that I had, But she for that hath made
							me wise— 
						 what is to hinder a man from taking his enemy as his teacher
						without fee, and profiting thereby, and thus learning, to some extent, the
						things of which he was unaware ? For there are many things which an enemy is
						quicker to perceive than a friend (for Love is blind regarding the loved
						one, as Plato says), and
						inherent in hatred, along with curiosity, is the inability to hold one's
						tongue. Hiero 
						was reviled by 
						 one of his enemies for his offensive breath ; so
						when he went home he said to his wife, What do you
							mean ? Even you never told me of this. But she being virtuous and
						innocent said, I supposed that all men smelt so. 
						Thus it is that things which are perceptible, material, and evident to all
						the world, may sooner be learned from our enemies than from our friends and
						close associates.

But, quite apart from this, control over the tongue, which is no small part
						of virtue, is something which it is impossible to keep always in subjection
						and obedience to the reasoning faculties, unless a man by training,
						practice, and industry has mastered the worst of his emotions, such as
						anger, for example. For the voice that slips out
							unintended, 
						 and the Word that
							has 'scaped the lips' prison, 
						 and Some of the sayings that flit forth of
								themselves, 
						 are all incident to temperaments that are quite untrained, and are
						unsteady and fluctuating, so to speak, owing to weakness of will, headstrong
						opinions, and a reckless way of living. Just for a word, the lightest thing
						in the world, is ordained, according to the divine Plato, heaviest punishment, coming from both gods and men. But
						silence cannot under any circumstances be called to an accounting (it is
						more than a preventive of thirst, as Hippocrates says
						of it), and in the midst of reviling it is 
						 dignified and Socratic, or rather Heraclean, if it
						be true that Heracles Not so much as to a fly gave
							heed to words of hatred. 
						 Indeed, there is nothing more dignified and noble than to maintain
						a calm demeanour when an enemy reviles one, Passing
							by a man's scoffs Just as swimmers swim past a precipitous rock, 
						 but far more important is the practice. If you once acquire the
						habit of bearing an enemy's abuse in silence, you will very easily bear up
						under a wife's attack when she rails at you, and without discomposure will
						patiently hear the most bitter utterances of a friend or a brother; and when
						you meet with blows or missiles at the hands of a father or mother, you will
						show no sign of passion or wrath. For instance, Socrates bore with
							Xanthippe, who was irascible and
						acrimonious, for he thought that he should have no difficulty in getting
						along with other people if he accustomed himself to bear patiently with her;
						but it is much better to secure this training from the scurrilous, angry,
						scoffing, and abusive attacks of enemies and outsiders, and thus accustom
						the temper to be unruffled and not even impatient in the midst of reviling.

In this manner, then, it is possible for us to display the qualities of
						gentleness and forbearance in connexion with our enmities, and also
						straightforwardness, magnanimity, and goodness better than in our
						friendships. For it is not so honourable to do a good turn to a friend as it
						is disgraceful not to do it when he is in need ; but even to forgo taking
							 
						 vengeance on an enemy when he offers a good
						opportunity is a handsome thing to do. But in case a man shows compassion
						for an enemy in affliction, and gives a helping hand to him when he has come
						to be in need, and displays some concern and zeal in behalf of his children
						and his household affairs when they come to want, I say that whosoever does
						not feel affection for such a man because of his kindliness, or does not
						commend his goodness, Hath a black heart Forged
							from adamant or else from steel. 
						 When Caesar gave orders that the statues in honour of Pompey, which
						had been thrown down, should be restored, Cicero said to him, You
							have restored Pompey's statues, but you have made your own secure. 
						Wherefore there must be no scanting of commendation or due honour in the
						case of an enemy who has justly gained a fair repute. For such an attitude
						wins greater commendation for those who bestow it, and inspires confidence,
						when later a man makes a complaint that he does so, not because he hates the
						person, but because he disapproves of the action. But best of all, and most
						advantageous, is the fact that a man is farthest removed from envying the
						good fortune of his friends or the success of his relatives, if he has
						acquired the habit of commending his enemies, and feeling no pang and
						cherishing no grudge when they prosper. And yet what other process of
						training produces greater benefit to our souls or a better disposition, than
						does that which takes from us all our jealousy and our proneness to envy ?
						Just as many of the things which are necessary in war, but bad under other
						conditions, when they once acquire the sanction of custom and law, cannot easily be abolished by the people even though
						the people are being injured by them, so enmity introduces envy along with
						hatred, and leaves as a residue jealousy, joy over others' misfortunes, and
						vindictiveness. Moreover, knavery, deceit, and intrigue, which seem not bad
						or unjust when employed against an enemy, if once they find a lodgement,
						acquire a permanent tenure, and are hard to eject. The next thing is that
						men of themselves employ these against their friends through force of habit,
						unless they are on their guard against using them against their enemies. If
						then Pythagoras was right when, in
						trying to accustom men to refrain from cruelty and rapacity in connexion
						with dumb animals, he used to intercede with fowlers, and buy up catches of
						fish and direct that they be released, and forbid the killing of any
						domesticated animal, it is surely a grander achievement by far, in
						disagreements and contentions with human beings, for a man to be a noble,
						honest, and ingenuous enemy, and to repress and put down his base, ignoble,
						and knavish propensities, so that in his dealings with his friends he may be
						always steadfast and may keep himself from wrongdoing. Scaurus was an enemy
						of Domitius and his accuser before the law. Now a servant of Domitius
						came to Scaurus before the trial, claiming to have information on some
						matters that had escaped Scaurus's knowledge, but Scaurus would not let him
						speak, and caused the man to be arrested and taken back to his master. When
						Cato was prosecuting Murena for corrupt political practices and was getting
						together his evidence, there followed him, in accordance with the usage of
						the time, men who watched what was being done. Very often they
						would ask him if he was intending that day to gather evidence or to do any
						work on the case, and if he said No, they believed
						him and went away. In these facts may be found the greatest proof of Cato's
						repute ; but it is a greater thing, and indeed the noblest, that, if we
						acquire the habit of practising honesty in dealing even with our enemies, we
						shall never deal dishonestly and knavishly with our intimate associates and
						friends.

But since On every lark a crest must grow, 
						as Simonides puts it, and since all human nature bears its crop of contention,
						jealousy, and envy, Boon comrade of rattle-brained
							men, as Pindar says, a man would profit in no moderate degree by
						venting these emotions upon his enemies, and turning the course of such
							discharges, so to speak, as far away as
						possible from his associates and relatives. This fact,
						as it seems, a statesman, Demus by name,e apprehended: when he found himself
						on the winning side in a civic strife in Chios, he advised his party
						associates not to banish all their opponents, but to leave some of them
						behind, in order, he said, that we may not begin to quarrel 
							 with our friends, through being completely rid
							of our enemies. So also in our own case, if our emotions of this
						sort are expended upon our enemies, they will cause less annoyance to our
						friends. For a potter must not envy potter, nor a minstrel
							a minstrel, as Hesiod puts it, nor must there be any feeling of rivalry against
						a neighbour or relative or brother who is winning his
							way towards riches and meeting with prosperity. But if there is no
						other way of getting rid of strifes, envies, and contentions, accustom
						yourself to feel the sting of resentment when your enemies enjoy health and
						happiness, and whet your contentiousness to a sharp jagged edge on these.
						For just as skilled gardeners believe that they improve their roses and
						violets by planting beside them garlic and onions (since whatever pungency
						and malod rousness there is in what the plants feed on is all drawn off into
						the vegetables), thus also your enemy, by taking up and diverting to himself
						your malice and jealousy, will render you more kindly and less disagreeable
						to your friends in their prosperity. For this reason it is with our enemies
						that we must also engage in rivalry for repute or office or honest
						money-getting, not only feeling the sting of resentment if they get the
						advantage of us, but also watching carefully every means by which they get
						the advantage, and trying to surpass them in painstaking, diligence,
						selfcontrol, and self-criticism: after the manner of Themistocles, who said
						that Miltiades' victory at Marathon would not let him sleep. 
						For he who thinks that it is by mere good luck that his enemy surpasses him
						in public offices, in pleading cases, in state administration, or in his
						standing with friends and leading men, and who from
						activity and emulation sinks down into a state of utter jealousy and
						discouragement, has abiding with him an envy that is inert and ineffectual.
						If, however, a man is not blind in regard to the object of his hatred, but makes himself an honest
						observer of the other's life, character, words, and deeds, he will discover
						that most of the successes which excite the envy of others come to those who
						have won them as the result of painstaking, forethought, and fair conduct,
						and so, bending all his energies in this direction, he will put into
						practice his own ambitions and high aspirations, and will eradicate his
						listlessness and indolence.

But even if our enemies by flattery, knavery, bribery, or hireling service
						appear to reap their reward in the form of dishonourable and sordid
						influence at court or in the government, they will not be a source of
						annoyance but rather of joy to us when we compare our own freedom, the
						simplicity of our life, and its immunity from scurrilous attack. For all the gold on earth and beneath the earth is not
							worth so much as virtue, as Plato says, and we must always keep ready
						in mind the sentiment of Solon : But we will not take in exchange
							All of their wealth for our virtue, nor yet the acclamations of
						spectators who have dined at our expense, nor honours such as front seats
						among eunuchs and concubines, and royal governorships ; for nothing enviable
						or noble ever springs from dishonour. But since love
							is blind regarding 
							 the loved one, as Plato says, and it is rather our enemies who by their unseemly conduct
						afford us an opportunity to view our own, neither our joy at their failures
						nor our sorrow at their successes ought to go without being employed to some
						purpose, but we should take into account both their failures and successes
						in studying how by guarding against the former we may be better than they,
						and by imitating the latter no worse.