When Dionysus led his host against the men of
Ind (surely there is nothing to prevent my telling
you a tale of Bacchus !), he was held at first in such
contempt, they say, by the people there, that they
laughed at his advance ; more than that, they pitied
him for his hardihood, because he was certain to be
trampled under foot in an instant by the elephants
if he deployed against them. No doubt they heard
curious reports about his army from their scouts:
“His rank and file are crack-brained, crazy women,
wreathed with ivy, dressed in fawn-skins, carrying
little headless spears which are of ivy too, and light
targes that boom if you do but touch them”—for
they supposed, no doubt, that the tambours were
shields. ‘A few young clodhoppers are with them,
dancing the can-can without any clothes on; they
have tails, and have horns like those which start
from the foreheads of new-born kids.

As for the
general himself, he rides on a car behind a team of
panthers; he is quite beardless, without even the
least bit of down on his cheek, has horns, wears
a garland of grape clusters, ties up his hair with

 

a ribbon, and is in a purple gown and gilt slippers.
He has two lieutenants. One is a short, thick-set
old man with a big belly, a flat nose and large,
up-standing ears, who is a bit shaky and walks with
a staff (though for the most part he rides on an ass),
and is also in a woman’s gown, which is yellow; he
is a very appropriate aide to such a chief! The
other is a misbegotten fellow like a goat in the
underpinning, with hairy legs, horns, and a long
beard; he is choleric and hot-headed, carries a
shepherd’s pipe in his left hand and brandishes a
crooked stick in his right, and goes bounding all
about the army. The women are afraid of him; they
toss their hair in the wind when he comes near and
cry out ‘Evoe.’ This we suppose to be the name of
their ruler. The flocks have already been harried -
by the women, and the animals torn limb from
limb while still alive; for they are eaters of raw
meat.”

On hearing this, the Hindoos and their king
roared with laughter, as well they might, and did
not care to take the field against them or to deploy
their troops ; at most, they said, they would turn their
women loose on them if they came near. They themselves thought it a shame to defeat them and kill
crazy women, a hair-ribboned leader, a drunken little
old man, a goat-soldie? and a lot of naked dancers—
ridiculous, every one of them! But word soon came
that the god was setting the country in a blaze,
burning up cities and their inhabitants and firing the
forests, and that he had speedily filled all India with


 

flame. (Naturally, the weapon of Dionysus is fire,
because it.is his father’s and comes from the thunderbolt. ) Then at last they hurriedly took arms,
saddled and bridled their elephants and put the
towers on them, and sallied out against the enemy.
Even then they despised them, but were angry at
them all the same, and eager to crush the life out of
the beardless general and his army.

When the
forces came together and saw one another, the
Hindoos posted their elephants in the van and
moved forward in close array. Dionysus had the
centre in person; Silenus commanded on the right
‘wing and Pan on the left. The Satyrs were commissioned as colonels and captains, and the general
watchword was ‘ Evoe.’ In a trice the tambours were
beat, the cymbals gave the signal for battle, one of
the Satyrs took his horn and sounded the charge,
Silenus’ jackass gave a martial hee-haw, and the
Maenads, serpent-girdled, baring the steel of their
thyrsus-points, fell on with a shriek. The Hindoos
and their elephants gave way at once and fled in
utter disorder, not even daring to get within range.
The outcome was that they were captured by force
of arms and led off prisoners by those whom they
had formerly laughed at, taught by experience that
strange armies should not have been despised on
hearsay.

“But what has your Dionysus to do with
Dionysus?”’ someone may say. This much: that
in my opinion (and in the name of the Graces don’t
suppose me in a corybantic frenzy or downright drunk
if I compare myself to the gods!) most people are in
the same state of mind as the Hindoos when they
encounter literary novelties, like mine for example.
Thinking that.what they hear from me will smack
of Satyrs and of jokes, in short, of comedy—for that
is the conviction they have formed, holding I know
not what opinion of me—some of them do not come
at all, believing it unseemly to come off their elephants and give their attention to the revels of
women and the skippings of Satyrs, while others
apparently come for something of that kind, and
when they find steel instead of ivy, are even then
slow to applaud, confused by the unexpectedness
of the thing. But I promise confidently that if
they are willing this time as they were before to
look often upon the mystic rites, and if my booncompanions of old remember “the revels we shared
in the days that are gone” and do not despise my
Satyrs and Sileni, but drink their fill of this bowl,
they too will know the Bacchic frenzy once again,
and will often join me in the “Evoe.”

But let them
do as they think fit: a man’s ears are his own!
As we are still in India, I want to tell you another
tale of that country which “has to do with Dionysus,”




 

like the first, and is not irrelevant to our business.
Among the Machlaean Indians who feed their flocks
on the left banks of the Indus river as you look down -
stream, and who reach clear to the Ocean—in their
country there is a grove in an enclosed place of no
great size; it'is completely sheltered, however, for
rank ivy and grapevines overshadow it quite. In it
there are three springs of fair, clear water: one
belongs to the Satyrs, another to Pan, the third to
Silenus. The Indians visit the place once a year,
celebrating the feast of the god, and they drink
from the springs: not, however, from all of them,
indiscriminately, but according to age. The boys
drink from the spring of the Satyrs, the men from
the spring of Pan, and those of my time of life from
the spring of Silenus.

What happens to the boys when they drink, and
what the men make bold to do under the influence of
Pan would make a long story; but what the old do
when they get drunk on the water is not irrelevant.
When an old man drinks and falls under the
influence of Silenus, at first he is mute for a long
time and appears drugged and sodden. Then of
a sudden he acquires a splendid voice, a distinct
utterance, a silvery tone, and is as talkative
as he was mute before. Even by gagging him you
couldn’t keep him from talking steadily and delivering long harangues. It is all sensible though, and
well ordered, and in the style of Homer’s famous
orator ; for their words fall “like the snows of
winter.” You can’t compare them to swans on



 

account of their age ; but like cicadas, they keep up
a constant roundelay till the afternoon is far spent.
Then, when the fumes of the drink leave them at
last, they fall silent and relapse into their old ways.
But I have not yet told you the strangest part of
it. If an old man is prevented by sunset from
reaching the end of the story which he is telling,
and leaves it unfinished, when he drinks again
another season he takes up what he was saying the
year before when the fumes left him!

Permit me this joke at my own expense, in the
spirit of Momus. I refuse to draw the moral, I
swear; for you already see how the fable applies to
me. If I make any slip, then, the fumes are to
blame, but if what I say should seem reasonable,
then Silenus has been good to me.