INTRODUCTION 
 
					It is only natural that this essay should have aroused
					curiosity and speculation about its sources, for Plutarch
					in the very first paragraph conveys the information
					that he has rummaged among his note-books ( ὑπομνήματα 
 ) in great haste for the material necessary to
					help his friend Paccius to composure in the midst of
					a busy life. R. Hirzel ( Hermes , xiv. 354 if., especially
					373 if.) attempted to show that much was drawn
					from Democritus’s Περὶ εὐθυμίης , some by way of the
					Stoic Panaetius, who, he thought, naturally opposed
					the Abderite’s conclusions. R. Heinze ( Rheinisches
						Museum , xlv. 497 ff.) emphasized the relation between
					 De Tranquillitate and De Virtute et Vitio : both go back
					to a Stoic prototype and De Tranquillitate to a model
					which has some close relation to the Cynic Bions
					methods of presentation, that is, probably, to Ariston
					of Chios. M. Pohlenz ( Hermes , xi. 275 if.), on the
					
					 
					
					other hand, found that the source of the essay was
					Epicurean, while admitting that Plutarch added a
					certain amount of original material to fit the personality and circumstances of the friend he was addressing. Finally, G. Siefert ( Plutarchs Schrift 
 Περὶ εὐθυμίας ,
					Progr. Pforta, Naumburg, 1908) reverts to
					Democritus and Panaetius, with particular emphasis
					on the material illustrative of Panaetius’s lost work
					to be found in Cicero’s De Officiis and in Seneca:
					Panaetius, who was following, not the Stoa, but
					Democritus, is the principal source of Plutarch,
					practically his only source.
				 
 
					Siefert’s discussion, in particular, is impressive
					as well as learned; but I would remark that all
					these authorities may well be right-and wrong.
					Some of them admit that portions, at least, of the
					essay were written, or adapted, especially to suit the
					particular occasion for which the essay was composed.
					Plutarch himself is not averse to naming authorities
					here and elsewhere; that he followed exclusively one,
					or even two, is made very unlikely by his own
					opening statement and by the very mixed nature of
					his philosophical terminology. 
					
				 
 
 
					Theological writers of all ages have made good use
					of this store-house of moral precepts. Many of the
					imitations in the works of St. Basil and of St. John
					Chrysostom will be found listed in the Teubner
					edition and discussed by Pohlenz ( Zeit.f. wiss. Theologie ,
					xlviii. 72-95). Jeremy Taylor, also, in Holy Living ,
					ii. 6, has again made some pleasant borrowings and
					paraphrases.
				 
 
					Sir Thomas Wyat’s interesting translation of 1528,
					made from the Latin of Budaeus, has been reprinted,
					with an excellent introduction from the pen of C. R.
					Baskervill, by the authorities of the Huntington
					Library (Harvard University Press, 1931).
				 
 
					The ms. tradition is not good. Many passages are
					probably hopelessly corrupt and the reconstructions
					offered in the Teubner text and here are, at the best,
					make-shifts. The work is No. 95 in the catalogue of
					Lamprias.

From Plutarch to Parcius, health and prosperity. 
 
 It was only very recently that I received your
					letter in which you urged me to write you something
					on tranquillity of mind, and also something on those
					subjects in the Timaeus 
 which require more careful
					elucidation. And at the same time it chanced that
					our friend Eros was obliged to sail at once for Rome,
					since he had received from the excellent Fundanus 
					a letter, which, in his usual style, urged haste. But
					since I neither had the time I might have desired to
					meet your wishes nor could I bring myself to let the
					friend who carne from me be seen arriving at your
					home with hands quite empty, I gathered together
					from my note-books those observations on tranquillity
					of mind which I happened to have made for my own
					use, believing that you on your part requested this
					discourse, not for the sake of hearing a work which
					would aim at elegance of style, but for the practical
					use in living it might afford; and I congratulate you
					because, though you have commanders as your friends
					and a reputation second to none of the forensic
					
					 
					
					speakers of our day, your experience has not been
					that of Merops in the play, and because it cannot
					be said of you, as of him, that
					 The plaudits of the mob have driven you 
 
					from those emotions given us by nature; but you
					continue to remember what you have often heard,
					that an aristocratic shoe does not rid us of the gout,
					nor an expensive ring of a hangnail, nor a diadem of
					a headache. For what power is there in money or
					fame or influence at court to help us to gain ease of
					soul or an untroubled life, if it is not true that the
					use of them is pleasant to us when we have them and
					that we never miss them when we have them not? 
					And how else can this be achieved except through
					reason, which has been carefully trained quickly to
					hold back the passionate and irrational part of the
					soul when it breaks bounds, as it often does, and
					not to allow it to flow away and be swept downstream
					because it does not have what it wants? Therefore,
					just as Xenophon advised that in prosperity we should
					be particularly mindful of the gods and should honour
					them, so that, when some need comes upon us, we
					may invoke them with the confidence that they are
					already well-disposed and friendly; so also with such
					reasonings as give help in controlling the passions:
					wise men should give heed to them before the passions
					arise in order that, being prepared far in advance,
					their help may be more efficacious. For as savage
					dogs become excited at every strange cry and are
					soothed by the familiar voice only, so also the passions
					of the soul, when they are raging wild, are not easily
					
					 
					
					allayed, unless customary and familiar arguments are
					at hand to curb the excited passions.

Now he who said, The man who would be tranquil in his mind must not engage in many affairs,
					either private or public, first of all makes our
					tranquillity very expensive if it is bought at the price
					of inactivity; it is as though he advised every sick
					man:
					 Lie still, poor wretch, and move not from your bed. 
 
					And yet it is true that a state of bodily stupor is a bad
					remedy for insanity; but no whit better as a physician of the soul is he who would relieve it of its disturbances and distress by prescribing idleness and
					softness and the betrayal of friends and family and
					country. 
				 
 
					In the next place, it is also false that those who are
					not occupied with many things are tranquil in mind.
					For if that were true, women ought to be more
					tranquil than men, since for the most part they keep
					at home; but as it is, the North Wind
					 Blows not through the soft-skinned maid, 
					as Hesiod says, yet more pain and excitement and
					despondency than one could enumerate, caused by
					jealousy and superstitition and ambition and vain
					
					 
					
					imaginings, seep into the women’s quarters. And
					though Laërtes lived twenty years by himself in
					the country
					 
 With one old woman, who his food and drink
						 
 Would place beside him, 
 
					and abandoned his birthplace, his home, and his
					kingship, yet he had grief as an ever-constant companion of his inactivity and dejection. And for
					some persons, even inactivity itself often leads to
					discontent, as in this instance:
					 
 The swift Achilles, Peleus’ noble son,
						 
 Continued in his wrath beside the ships;
						 
 Nor would he ever go to council that
						 
 Ennobles men, nor ever go to war,
						 
 But wasted away his heart, remaining there,
						 
 And always longed for tumult and for war. 
 
 
					And he himself is greatly disturbed and distressed at
					this and says:
					 
						 But here I sit beside my ships, 
						 A useless burden to the earth. 
 
					For this reason not even Epicurus believes that men
					who are eager for honour and glory should lead an
					inactive life, but that they should fulfil their natures
					by engaging in politics and entering public life, on
					the ground that, because of their natural dispositions,
					they are more likely to be disturbed and harmed by
					inactivity if they do not obtain what they desire.
					But he is absurd in urging public life, not on those who
					are able to undertake it, but on those who are unable
					
					 
					
					to lead an inactive life; tranquillity and discontent
					should be determined, not by the multitude or the
					fewness of one’s occupations, but by their excellence
					or baseness; for the omission of good acts is no less
					vexatious and disturbing than the commission of evil
					acts, as has been said.

To those who believe that one quite special kind
					of life is free from pain, as some do the life of farmers,
					others that of bachelors, others that of kings, the
					words of Menander are a sufficient reminder:
					 
 I used to think the wealthy, Phanias,
						 
 Who have no need to borrow, would not groan
						 
 Of nights, nor tossing up and down would cry
						 
 
 Ah, woe is me! but that they slept a sweet
						 
 And tranquil sleep. 
 
					He then goes on to relate that he observes that even
					the wealthy fare the same as the poor:
					 
 Is there then kinship between life and grief?
						 
 Grief’s in a famous life; with a rich life
						 
 It stays; with a mean life it too grows old. 
 
					But like people at sea who are cowardly and seasick and think that they would get through this
					voyage more comfortably if they should transfer
					from their little boat to a ship, and then again
					from the ship to a man-of-war; but they accomplish
					nothing by the changes, since they carry their nausea
					and cowardice along with them; so the exchange of
					one mode of life for another does not relieve the soul
					
					 
					
					of those things which cause it grief and distress :
					these are inexperience in affairs, unreasonableness,
					the want of ability or knowledge to make the right
					use of present conditions. These are the defects
					which, like a storm at sea, torment rich and poor alike,
					that afflict the married as well as the unmarried;
					because of these men avoid public life, then find their
					life of quiet unbearable; because of these men seek
					advancement at court, by which, when they have
					gained it, they are immediately bored.
					 Through helplessness the sick are hard to please, 
 
					for their wives are troublesome, they grumble at the
					doctor, they are vexed with the bed,
					 Each friend that comes annoys, that goes affronts, 
					as Ion has it. But later, when the disease is over
					and a sounder disposition supervenes, health returns
					and makes everything pleasant and agreeable : he
					that yesterday loathed eggs and delicate cakes and
					fine bread to-day eats eagerly and willingly of a coarse
					loaf with olives and water-cress.

Such contentment and change of view toward
					every kind of life is created by reason when it has
					been engendered within us. Alexander wept when
					he heard Anaxarchus discourse about an infinite
					number of worlds, and when his friends inquired what
					ailed him, Is it not worthy of tears, he said, that,
						when the number of worlds is infinite, we have not
						
						 
						
						yet become lords of a single one? But Crates,
					though he had but a wallet and a threadbare cloak,
					passed his whole life jesting and laughing as though
					at a festival. It was, indeed, burdensome to Agamemnon to be lord of many men:
					 
 Agamemnon you shall know, King Atreus’ son,
						 
 Whom, beyond all, Zeus cast into a mesh
						 
 Of never-ending cares ; 
 
					but Diogenes, when he was being sold at auction, 
					lay down on the ground and kept mocking the
					auctioneer; when this official bade him arise, he
					would not, but joked and ridiculed the man, saying,
					 Suppose you were selling a fish? And Socrates, 
					though in prison, discoursed on philosophic themes to
					his friends; but Phaethon, when he had mounted up
					to heaven, wept because no one would deliver to him
					his father’s horses and chariot.
				 
 
					So, just as the shoe is turned with the foot, and not
					the contrary, so do men’s dispositions make their
					lives like themselves. For it is not, as someone has
					said, habituation which makes the best life sweet to
					those who have chosen it, but wisdom which makes
					the same life at once both best and sweetest. Therefore let us cleanse the fountain of tranquillity that is
					in our own selves, in order that external things also,
					as if our very own and friendly, may agree with us
					when we make no harsh use of them:
					
					 
					
					 
 It does no good to rage at circumstance;
						 
 Events will take their course with no regard
						 
 For us. But he who makes the best of those
						 
 Events he lights upon will not fare ill.

Plato, for instance, compared life to a game of
					dice in which we must try, not only to throw what suits
					us best, but also, when we have thrown, to make good
					use of whatever turns up. But with circumstances,
					though it is not in our power to throw what we
					please, yet it is our task, if we are wise, to accept in a
					suitable manner whatever accrues from Fortune and
					to assign to each event a place in which both what
					suits us shall help us most and what is unwanted shall
					do least harm. For those who are without skill and
					sense as to how they should live, like sick people
					whose bodies can endure neither heat nor cold, are
					elated by good fortune and depressed by adversity;
					and they are greatly disturbed by both, or rather by
					themselves in both and as much in what is called
					good as in the bad. Theodorus, called the Atheist,
					used to say that he offered his discourses with his right
					hand, but his audience received them with their left;
					so uninstructed persons, when Fortune presents herself adroitly on their right, often gauchely substitute
					their left hands in receiving her and cut a sorry
					figure. But men of sense, just as bees extract
					honey from thyme, the most pungent and the driest
					
					 
					
					of plants, often in like manner draw from the most
					unfavourable circumstances something which suits
					them and is useful.

This, then, we should practice and cultivate first
					of all, like the man who threw a stone at his dog, but
					missed her and hit his stepmother, whereupon he
					exclaimed, Not so bad after all! 
 For it is
					possible to change the direction of Fortune when she
					has given us things we do not wish. Diogenes was
					driven into exile: Not so bad after all! for after
					his exile he began to lead the life of a philosopher.
					Zeno of Citium had one merchantman remaining;
					when he learned that this had been sunk at sea and
					lost with all its cargo, he cried, Much obliged,
						Fortune! You also drive me to the philosopher’s
						cloak. 
 
				 
 
					What, then, prevents our imitating such men as
					these? Have you failed in your canvass for an office?
					You will be able to live in the country and look after
					your own affairs. Were you repulsed in wooing the
					friendship of some great man? Your life will be free
					from danger and trouble. Have you, again, become
					occupied with matters which take all your time and
					fill you with cares?
					 Nor shall hot water so soften the limbs, 
					
					 
					
					as Pindar has it, since high repute and honour conjoined with a measure of power make
					 Labour pleasant and toil to be sweet toil. 
 
					Have you, by reason of slander or envy, become the
					butt of jeers and cat-calls? The breeze is favouring
					that bears you to the Muses and the Academy, as it
					was for Plato when he was buffeted by the storm
					of Dionysius’s friendship.
				 
 
					For this reason it will also help greatly toward
					tranquillity of mind to observe that famous men have
					suffered nothing at all from evils the same as yours.
					Does childlessness, for example, vex you? Consider
					the kings of Rome, of whom not one was able to
					bequeath the kingdom to a son. Are you distressed
					by your present poverty? Well, what Boeotian
					rather than Epameinondas, what Roman rather than
					Fabricius, would you have preferred to be? But
						my wife has been seduced. Have you, then, not
					read the inscription at Delphi,
					 The lord of land and sea, King Agis, put me here ; 
					and have you not heard that Alcibiades seduced
					Agis’s wife, Timaea, and that, whispering to her handmaids, she called her child Alcibiades? But this did
					not prevent Agis from being the most celebrated and
					
					 
					
					the greatest of Greeks. Just as the licentiousness
					of his daughter did not prevent Stilpo from leading the most cheerful life of all the philosophers
					of his time; on the contrary, when Metrocles reproached him, he asked, Is this my fault or hers? 
					And when Metrocles replied, Her fault, but your
						misfortune, he said, What do you mean? Are
							not faults also slips? 
 Certainly, said Metrocles.
					 And are not slips also mischances of those who
						have slipped? Metrocles agreed. And are not
							mischances also misfortunes of those whose mischances they are? By this gentle and philosophic
					argument he showed the Cynics abuse to be but
					idle yapping.

But most people are pained and exasperated by
					the faults, not only of their friends and relatives, but
					also of their enemies. For abuse and rage on their
					part, envy and malevolence and jealousy, coupled
					with ill-will, are the bane of those who are subject to
					these faults, but it is fools whom they trouble and
					exasperate-as, for example, neighbours’ outbursts of
					temper and friends’ peevishness, and certain acts of
					dishonesty on the part of state officials charged with
					administration. By these things you yourself seem
					to me to be disturbed as much as anybody, and like
					the physicians to whom Sophocles alludes -
					 With bitter drugs they purge the bitter bile - 
					so you become angry and bitter against these men
					and suffer from their passions and infirmities; but this
					is irrational. For even in the execution of matters
					committed to your personal care, most of them are in
					fact administered, not by simple and excellent natures,
					
					 
					
					men naturally suited to be another’s instruments, as
					it were, but by jagged and crooked ones. Do not,
					therefore, consider it your business to straighten
					them out, and it would not in any case be easy to do
					so. But if - dealing with them as being what they are
					by nature, just as a physician uses forceps for teeth
					and clips for wounds - you show yourself as gentle
					and self-controlled as you can, you will have greater
					pleasure in your own state of mind than distress at
					the unpleasantness and villainy of those others,
					and you will think that they, like dogs when
					they bark, are but fulfilling their nature; and no
					longer will you unwittingly gather into this present
					captiousness or infirmity of yours many grievances,
					like offscourings which drain into some hollow and
					low-lying ground, thus letting yourself be infected
					with the vices of others. For since some of the philosophers censure even pity that is expended upon
					unfortunate persons, on the ground that it is good to
					give help to our neighbours, but not to participate in
					their sorrows nor give in to them; and, what is more
					important, since these philosophers do not allow us,
					when we perceive ourselves to be doing wrong and
					to be getting into a bad state of mind, to despair or
					be dejected, but bid us cure our vice painlessly, as we
					should: just consider, then - how can it be anything
					but irrational to allow ourselves to become vexed and
					troubled because not everyone who has dealings with
					us or approaches us is honourable and cultivated?
					No, my dear Paccius, you must see to it that we
					are not unwittingly taking a stand in alarm, not at the
					
					 
					
					general wickedness of those we encounter, but at
					their particular wickedness to us; so our motive
					would be a selfish interest, not detestation of villainy. 
					For excessive apprehension about public affairs and
					unworthy appetites and desires, or, on the other
					hand, aversions and dislikes, engender suspicions and
					enmities toward persons who were, we think, the
					cause of our being deprived of some desirable things
					and of our encountering others which are unpleasant;
					it is the man who has become accustomed to adapt
					himself to public affairs easily and with self-control
					who becomes the most gracious and gentle in his
					dealings with his fellows.

Therefore let us resume our discussion of circumstances. For just as in a fever everything we eat
					seems bitter and unpleasant to the taste, and yet
					when we see others taking the same food and
					finding no displeasure in it, we no longer continue to
					blame the food and the drink, but accuse ourselves
					and our malady; so we shall cease blaming and being
					disgruntled with circumstances if we see others
					accepting the same events cheerfully and without
					offence. And so it is conducive to tranquillity of
					mind, in the midst of happenings which are contrary to
					our wishes, not to overlook whatever we have that is
					pleasant and attractive, but, mingling good with bad,
					cause the better to outshine the worse. But as it is,
					while we turn away our eyes when they are wounded
					by too dazzling a light and refresh them with the tints
					and hues of flowers and grass, yet we strain the
					mind toward painful things and force it to dwell on
					the consideration of disagreeable matters, all but
					
					 
					
					dragging it by compulsion away from those wThich are
					better. And yet one might adapt here not inaptly
					the remark addressed to the meddlesome man :
					 
 Why do you look so sharp on others’ ills,
						 
 Malignant man, yet overlook your own? 
 
					Why do you scrutinize too keenly your own trouble,
					my good sir, and continue to make it ever vivid and
					fresh in your mind, but do not direct your thoughts
					to those good things which you have? But, just
					as cupping-glasses draw the most virulent humour
					from the flesh, so you gather together against
					yourself the worst of your own conditions, proving
					yourself not a whit better than the man of Chios who
					sold excellent old wine to everyone else, but tried to
					find sour wine for his own luncheon; and when one
					of his slaves was asked by the other what he had
					left his master doing, he answered, Hunting bad
						when good was at hand. Most persons, in fact, do
					pass by the excellent and palatable conditions of
					their lot and hasten to those that are unpleasant and
					disagreeable. Aristippus, however, was not one of
					these, but was wise enough, like one who weighs
					things in a balance, by weighing the bad against the
					better, to rise above the conditions in which he
					found himself and thus to lighten his spirits. At
					any rate, when he had lost a fine estate, he asked one
					of those who made a great pretence of condoling with
					him and sharing in his ill humour at misfortune,
					
					 
					
					 Isn’t it true that you have only one small bit of
						land, while I have three farms remaining? When
					the person agreed that this was so, Aristippus said,
					 Should I not then rather condole with you? For
					it is the act of a madman to be distressed at what is
					lost and not rejoice at what is saved, but like little
					children, who, if someone takes away one of their
					many toys, will throw away all the rest as well and
					cry and howl; in the same way, if we are troubled
					by Fortune in one matter, we make everything else
					also unprofitable by lamenting and taking it hard.

And what, someone may say, do we really
					have and what do we not have? One man has
					reputation, another a house, another a wife, another
					a good friend. Antipater of Tarsus, on his deathbed reckoning up the good things that had fallen to
					his lot, did not omit even the fair voyage he had from
					Cilicia to Athens; so we should not overlook even
					common and ordinary things, but take some account
					of them and be grateful that we are alive and well
					and look upon the sun; that there is neither war
					nor factious strife among us, but that both the earth
					grants cultivation and the sea fair sailing to those
					who wish it; that we may speak or act, be silent or
					at leisure, as we choose. These things when they
					are present will afford us greater tranquillity of mind,
					if we but imagine them to be absent, and remind
					ourselves often how desirable is health to the sick, and
					peace to those at war, and, to an unknown stranger in
					so great a city, the acquisition of reputation and
					
					 
					
					friends; and how painful it is to be deprived of these
					things when we have once had them. For it will not
					then be the case that we find each one of these important and valuable only when it has been lost, but
					worthless while securely held. Our not possessing
					it does not add value to anything, nor should we acquire these things as though they were of great worth
					and live in fear and trembling as though for things
					of great moment, lest we be deprived of them, and
					yet while we have them overlook and despise them
					as of no value: we should above all take care to use
					them for our pleasure and enjoyment, in order that
					we may bear their loss, if that should happen, with
					greater moderation. But most people, as Arcesilaüs
					said, think it right to examine poems and paintings
					and statues of others with the eyes of both the mind
					and the body, poring over them minutely and in
					every detail, whereas they neglect their own life,
					which has many not unpleasing subjects for contemplation, looking ever to externals and admiring the
					repute and the fortunes of others, as adulterers do
					other men’s wives, yet despising themselves and
					their own possessions.

And yet it is also highly conducive to tranquillity of mind to examine, if possible, oneself and
					one’s fortunes, but if that is not possible, to observe
					persons of inferior fortune, and not, as most people
					do, compare oneself with those who are superior; as,
					for example, those in prison account fortunate these
					who have been set free ; and they, men born
					free; and free men, citizens; and citizens, in their
					turn, the rich; and the rich, satraps; and satraps,
					kings; and kings, the gods, scarcely stopping short of
					
					 
					
					desiring the power to produce thunder and lightning.
					Thus, through being always conscious that they lack
					things which are beyond them, they are never grateful for what befits their station.
					 
 I want no wealth of Gyges rich in gold,
						 
 Nor have I ever envied him; I am
						 
 Not jealous of gods’ works, nor love a great
						 
 Kingdom: such things are far beyond my ken. 
 
 
					 But he was a Thasian, one may say. Yet there
					are others, Chians, Galatians, or Bithynians, who are
					not content with whatever portion of either repute
					or power among their own fellow-countrymen has
					fallen to their lot, but weep because they do not
					wear the patrician shoe; yet if they do wear it, they
					weep because they are not yet Roman praetors; if
					they are praetors, because they are not consuls; and
					if consuls, because they were proclaimed, not first,
					but later. What is this other than collecting excuses
					for ingratitude to Fortune in order to chastise and
					punish oneself? But he, at least, who has a mind
					filled with salutary thoughts, knowing that the sun
					looks down upon countless myriads of men,
					 As many of us as win the fruit of the spacious earth, 
 
					if he be less famous or wealthy than some others, does
					not sit down in sorrow and dejection, but since he
					knows that he lives ten thousand times better and
					
					 
					
					more suitably than tens of thousands in so great a
					number, he will go on his way praising his own
					guardian spirit and his life.
				 
 
					Now at Olympia you cannot win the victory
					by selecting competitors, but in this life circumstances permit you to take pride in your superiority
					to many, and to be an object of envy rather than
					envious of the others - unless, indeed, you make a
					Briareus or a Heracles your opponent. Whenever,
					then, you are lost in admiration of a man borne in his
					litter as being superior to yourself, lower your eyes
					and gaze upon the litter-bearers also; and whenever
					you account happy, as the man of Hellespont did,
					that famous Xerxes crossing his bridge, look also
					upon those who are digging through Athos beneath
					the lash, and those whose ears and noses are mutilated
					because the bridge was broken by the current. Consider also their state of mind: they account happy
					your life and your fortunes.
				 
 
					When Socrates heard one of his friends remark
					how expensive the city was, saying Chian wine costs
						a mina, a purple robe three minae, a half-pint of
						honey five drachmas, he took him by the hand and
					led him to the meal-market, Half a peck for an
						obol! the city is cheap ; then to the olive-market,
					 A quart for two coppers! ; then to the clothesmarket, A sleeveless vest for ten drachmas! the
						city is cheap. We also, therefore, whenever we hear
					another say that our affairs are insignificant and in a
					
					 
					
					woeful plight because we are not consuls or governors,
					may reply, Our affairs are splendid and our life is
						enviable: we do not beg, or carry burdens, or live
						by flattery.

Yet since, however, through our folly we have
					grown accustomed to live with eyes fixed on everyone
					else rather than on ourselves, and since our nature
					contains much envy and malice and does not rejoice
					so much in our own blessings as it is pained by those
					which other men possess, do not look only at the
					splendour and notoriety of those you envy and wonder
					at, but open and, as it were, draw aside the gaudy
					curtain of their repute and outward appearance,
					and get inside them, and you will see many disagreeable things and many things to vex them there.
					Thus, when that renowned Pittacus, whose fame
					for bravery and for wisdom and justice was great,
					was entertaining some guests, his wife entered in a
					rage and upset the table; his guests were dismayed,
					but Pittacus said, Every one of us has some
						trouble. He that has only mine is doing very well
						indeed. 
					 
 This man’s held happy in the market-place,
						 
 But when he enters home, thrice-wretched he:
						 
 His wife rules all, commands, and always fights.
						 
 His woes are more than mine, for mine are none! 
 
 
					Many such evils attend wealth and repute and kingship, evils unknown to the vulgar, for ostentation
					hinders the vision.
					 
 O happy son of Atreus, child of destiny,
						 
 Blessed with a kindly guardian spirit! 
 
 
					
					 
					
					Such felicitation comes from externals only - for his
					arms and horses and far-flung host of warriors; but
					against the emptiness of his glory the voice of his
					sufferings cries out in protest from the very heart:
					 
 The son of Cronus, Zeus, entangled me
						 
 In deep infatuation, 
 
 
					and
					 
 I envy you, old man;
						 
 I envy any man whose life has passed
						 
 Free from danger, unknown and unrenowned. 
 
 
					By such reflections also, then, it is possible to reduce
					the violence of our fault-finding with fate, fault-finding which, through admiration of our neighbours’
					lot, both debases and destroys our own.

Further, another matter which greatly interferes with tranquillity of mind is that we do not
					manage our impulses, as sailors do their sails, to
					correspond to our capacity; in our expectations we
					aim at things too great; then, when we fail, we blame
					our destiny and our fortune instead of our own folly.
					For he is not unfortunate who wishes to shoot with
					his plough and hunt the hare with his ox, nor does
					a malicious destiny oppose him who cannot capture
					deer or boar with fishing creels or drag-nets; it is
					through folly and stupidity that such men attempt
					the impossible. And self-love is chiefly to blame,
					which makes men eager to be first and to be victorious
					in everything and insatiably desirous of engaging in
					everything. For not only do men demand to be at
					the same time rich and learned and strong and convivial
					
					 
					
					spirits and good company, and friends of kings
					and magistrates of cities, but unless they shall also
					have dogs and horses and quails and cocks that can
					win prizes, they are disconsolate.
				 
 
					The elder Dionysius was not content with being
					the greatest tyrant of his age, but because he could
					not sing verses better than the poet Philoxenus or
					get the better of Plato in dialectic, enraged and
					embittered, he cast Philoxenus into the stone-quarries, and, sending Plato to Aegina, sold him into
					slavery. Alexander was not of this temper, but
					when Crison, the famous sprinter, ran a race with
					him and appeared to slacken his pace deliberately,
					Alexander was very indignant. And when the
					Homeric Achilles had first said,
					 Of the bronze-clad Achaeans none is a match for me, 
					he did well to add,
					 In war; but in speaking others are better than I. 
					But when Megabyzus the Persian carne up to the
					studio of Apelles and attempted to chatter about
					art, Apelles shut his mouth by saying, As long as
						you kept still, you seemed to be somebody because of
						your gold and purple; but now even these lads who
						grind the pigments are laughing at your nonsense. 
				 
 
					But some think that the Stoics are jesting when
					they hear that in their sect the wise man is termed
					not only prudent and just and brave, but also an
					
					 
					
					orator, a poet, a general, a rich man, and a king;
					and then they count themselves worthy of all these
					titles, and if they fail to get them, are vexed. Yet
					even among the gods different gods hold different
					powers: one bears the epithet War-like, another
					 Prophetic, another Gain-bringing ; and Zeus 
					dispatches Aphrodite to marriages and nuptial
					chambers, on the ground that she has no part in
					deeds of war.

There are, indeed, some pursuits which cannot by their very nature exist together, but rather
					are by nature opposed to each other; for example,
					training in rhetoric and the pursuit of mathematics
					require a quiet life and leisure, while political
					functions and the friendship of kings cannot succeed
					without hard work and the full occupation of one’s
					time. And 
 wine and indulgence in meat do
					indeed make the body strong and vigorous, but the
						soul weak 
 ; and unremitting care to acquire and
					preserve money increases wealth, yet contempt and
					disdain for it is greatly conducive to progress in
					philosophy. Therefore not all pursuits are for everyone, but one must, obeying the Pythian inscription,
					 know one’s self, and then use one’s self for that one
					thing for which Nature has fitted one and not do
					violence to nature by dragging one’s self towards the
					emulation of now one sort of life, now another.
					
					 
					
					 
 The horse is for the chariot;
						 
 The ox for the plough; beside the ship most swiftly speeds the dolphin;
						 
 And if you think to slay a boar, you must find a stout-hearted hound. 
 
 
					But that man is out of his wits who is annoyed and
					pained that he is not at the same time both a lion
					 Bred on the mountains, sure of his strength, 
 
					and a little Maltese dog cuddled in the lap of a
					widow. But not a whit better than he is the man
					who wishes at the same time to be an Empedocles or
					a Plato or a Democritus, writing about the universe
					and the true nature of reality, and, like Euphorion, to
					be married to a wealthy old woman, or, like Medius, 
					to be one of Alexander’s boon companions and drink
					with him; and is vexed and grieved if he is not admired for his wealth, like Ismenias, and also for his
					valour, like Epameinondas. We know that runners
					are not discouraged because they do not carry off
					wrestlers’ crowns, but they exult and rejoice in their
					own.
					 Your portion is Sparta: let your crowns be for her! 
 
					So also Solon :
					
					 
					
					 
 But we shall not exchange with them our virtue
						 
 For their wealth, since virtue is a sure possession,
						 
 But money falls now to this man, now that. 
 
					And Strato, the natural philosopher, when he heard
					that Menedemus had many more pupils than he
					himself had, said, Why be surprised if there are
						more who wish to bathe than to be anointed for the
						contest? 
 And Aristotle, writing to Antipater,
					said, It is not Alexander alone who has the right to
						be proud because he rules over many men, but no less
						right to be proud have they who have true notions
						concerning the gods. For those who have such
					lofty opinions of their own possessione will not be
					offended by their neighbours’ goods. But as it is,
					we do not expect the vine to bear figs nor the olive
					grapes, but, for ourselves, if we have not at one and
					the same time the advantages of both the wealthy
					and the learned, of both commanders and philosophers, of both flatterers and the outspoken, of
					both the thrifty and the lavish, we slander ourselves,
					we are displeased, we despise ourselves as living an
					incomplete and trivial life.
				 
 
					Furthermore, we see that Nature also admonishes
					us; for just as she has provided different foods for
					different beasts and has not made them all carnivorous or seed-pickers or root-diggers, so has she
					
					 
					
					given to men a great variety of means for gaining
					a livelihood,
					 
 To shepherd and ploughman and fowler and to him w hom
						the sea
						 
 Provides with sustenance. 
 
 
					We should, therefore, choose the calling appropriate
					to ourselves, cultivate it diligently, let the rest alone,
					and not prove that Hesiod spoke inexactly when
					he said,
					 Potter is angry with potter, joiner with joiner. 
					For not only are men jealous of fellow-craftsmen and
					those who share the same life as themselves, but also
					the wealthy envy the learned, the famous the rich,
					advocates the sophists, and, by Heaven free men
					and patricians regard with wondering admiration
					and envy successful comedians in the theatre and
					dancers and servants in the courts of kings; and by
					so doing they afford themselves no small vexation
					and disturbance.

But that every man has within himself the storerooms of tranquillity and discontent, and that the jars
					containing blessings and evils are not stored on the
						threshold of Zeus, 
 but are in the soul, is made
					plain by the differences in men’s passions. For the
					foolish overlook and neglect good things even when
					they are present, because their thoughts are ever
					intent upon the future, but the wise by remembrance
					
					 
					
					make even those benefits that are no longer at hand
					to be vividly existent for themselves. For the
					present good, which allows us to touch it but for the
					smallest portion of time and then eludes our perception, seems to fools to have no further reference
					to us or to belong to us at all; but like that painting
					of a man twisting rope in Hades, who permits a
					donkey grazing near by to eat it up as he plaits it, so
					insensible and thankless forgetfulness steals upon the
					multitude and takes possession of them, consuming
					every action and success, every pleasant moment of
					leisure and companionship and enjoyment; it does
					not allow life to become unified, when past is interwoven with present, but separating yesterday, as
					though it were different, from to-day, and to-morrow
					likewise, as though it were not the same as to-day,
					forgetfulness straightway makes every event to have
					never happened because it is never recalled. For
					those who in the Schools do away with growth and
					increase on the ground that Being is in a continual
					flux, in theory make each of us a series of persons
					different from oneself ; so those who do not preserve or recall by memory former events, but allow
					them to flow away, actually make themselves deficient and empty each day and dependent upon the
					morrow, as though what had happened last year and
					yesterday and the day before had no relation to
					them nor had happened to them at all.

This, then, is a matter disturbing to tranquillity
					
					 
					
					of mind; and another, even more disturbing, arises
					when, like flies which slip off the smooth surfaces
					of mirrors, but stick to places which are rough or
					scratched, men drift away from joyous and agreeable
					matters and become entangled in the remembrance of
					unpleasant things; or rather, as they relate that when
					beetles have fallen into a place at Olynthus which is
					called Death-to-Beetles, 
 they are unable to get
					out, but turn and circle about there until they die in
					that place, so when men have slipped into brooding
					upon their misfortunes, they do not wish to recover
					or revive from that state. But, like colours in a
					painting,b so in the soul it is right that we should
					place in the foreground bright and cheerful experiences and conceal and suppress the gloomy; for to
					wipe them out and be rid of them altogether is
					impossible. For the harmony of the universe, like
						that of a lyre or a bow, is by alternatives, 
 and in
					mortal affairs there is nothing pure and unmixed.
					But as in music there are low notes and high notes,
					and in grammar there are vowels and consonants, yet
					a musician or a grammarian is not the man who dislikes
					and avoids the one or the other, but rather the man
					who knows how to use all and to blend them properly, 
					so also in human affairs, which contain the principles
					of opposition to each other (since, as Euripides has
					it,
					 
 The good and bad cannot be kept apart,
						 
 But there’s some blending, so that all is well), 
 
					
					 
					
					we should not be disheartened or despondent in
					adversity, but like musicians who achieve harmony by
					consistently deadening bad music with better and
					encompassing the bad with the good, we should make
					the blending of our life harmonious and conformable
					to our own nature.
					For it is not true, as Menander says, that
					 
 By every man at birth a Spirit stands,
						 
 A guide of virtue for life’s mysteries; 
 
					but rather, as Empedocles affirms, two Fates, as it
					were, or Spirits, receive in their care each one of us
					at birth and consecrate us:
					 
 Chthonia was there and far-seeing Heliope,
						 
 And bloody Deris, grave-eyed Harmonia,
						 
 Callisto, Aeschra, Thoosa, and Denaea,
						 
 Lovely Nemertes, dark-eyed Asapheia.

The result is that since we at our birth received the mingled seeds of each of these affections,
					and since therefore our nature possesses much
					unevenness, a man of sense prays for better things,
					but expects the contrary as well, and, avoiding excess,
					deals with both conditions. For not only does he
						who has least need of the morrow, as Epicurus 
					says, most gladly advance to meet the morrow, 
					but also wealth and reputation and power and public
					office delight most of all those who least fear their
					
					 
					
					opposites. For the violent desire for each of these
					implants a most violent fear that they may not
					remain, and so renders pleasure in them weak and
					unstable, like a fluttering flame. But the man whom
					Reason enables to say to Fortune without fear and
					trembling,
					 
 Welcome to me if any good you bring;
						 
 But if you fail, the pain is very slight, 
 
 
					his confidence and the absence of fear that their loss
					would be unbearable cause him to make most pleasant
					use of present advantages. For it is possible not only
					to admire the disposition of Anaxagoras, which made
					him say at the death of his son, I knew that my
						son was mortal, but also to imitate it and to apply
					it to every dispensation of Fortune: I know that my
						wealth is temporary and insecure, 
 I know that those
							who bestowed my magistracy can take it away, 
 I
								know that my wife is excellent, but a woman, and that
								my friend is but a man, by nature an animal readily
								subject to change, as Plato said. For men of such
					preparedness and of such disposition, if anything
					unwished yet not unexpected happens, disdain sentiments like these: I never should have thought it, 
					or I had hoped for other things, or I did not
						expect this, and so do away with anything like throbbings and palpitations of the heart, and speedily restore
					again to quiet the madness and disturbance of their
					minds. Carneades, indeed, reminded us that in
					matters of great importance it is the unexpected 
					that is completely and wholly the cause of grief and
					
					 
					
					dejection. For example, the kingdom of Macedonia
					was infinitely smaller than the Roman dominion, yet
					when Perseus lost Macedonia, both he himself bewailed his own evil genius and every one thought that
					he had become the most unfortunate and ill-starred
					man in the world ; but Aemilius, his conqueror,
					handed over to another his supreme command of
					practically the whole earth and sea, yet was crowned
					and offered sacrifice and was esteemed fortunate -
					and with good reason, for he knew that he had taken
					a command which would have to be relinquished
					again, whereas Perseus lost his kingdom when he had
					not expected to do so. And well has the Poet taught
					us how strong the effect of an unexpected happening
					is: Odysseus, for instance, shed a tear when his
					dog fawned upon him, yet when he sat beside his
					weeping wife, gave way to no such emotion; for into
					the latter situation he had come with his emotion
					under control and fortified by reason, but he had
					stumbled into the former without having expected it,
					and suddenly.

And, to speak generally, although some of the
					things which happen against our will do by their very
					nature bring pain and distress, yet since it is through
					false opinion that we learn and become accustomed
					to be disgruntled with the greatest part of them, it is
					not unprofitable to have the verse of Menander 
					ever ready against the latter:
					 No harm’s been done you, if you none admit 
					
					 
					
					(for what, he means, if they touch neither body nor
					soul, are such things to you as the low birth of your
					father, or the adultery of your wife, or the deprivation
					of a crown or of front seats, since when these misfortunes are present a man is not prevented from
					having both body and soul in the best of condition?);
					and against those things which seem to pain us by
					their very nature, as sicknesses, anxieties, and the
					death of friends and children, we should have ready
					that famous verse of Euripides :
					 
 Alas! - Yet why alas? Our sufferings
						 
 Are but what we mortals must endure. 
 
					For no reasoning so effectively engages the emotional
					part of us, when it is being borne down and is
					slipping, as that which reminds us of the common and
					natural necessity to which man is exposed through his
					composite and corporeal nature: it is the only hold
					he gives to Fortune, while in his most vital and
					important parts he stands secure.
				 
 
					When Demetrius took the Megarians’ city, he asked
					Stilpo if any of his possessions had been plundered.
					And Stilpo said, I saw no one carrying off my property. 
 And therefore when Fortune plunders and
					strips us of everything else, we have something
					within ourselves of the sort that
					 Achaeans could never harry or plunder. 
 
					
					 
					
					Therefore we should not altogether debase and
					depreciate Nature in the belief that she has nothing
					strong, stable, and beyond the reach of Fortune, but,
					on the contrary, since we know that the corrupt and
					perishable part of man wherein he lies open to
					Fortune is small, and that we ourselves are masters of
					the better part, in which the greatest of our blessings
					are situated - right opinions and knowledge and the
					exercise of reason terminating in the acquisition
					of virtue, all of which have their being inalienable and
					indestructible - knowing all this, we should face the
					future undaunted and confident and say to Fortune
					what Socrates, when he was supposed to be replying
					to his accusers, was really saying to the jury, Anytus
						and Meletus are able to take away my life, but they
						cannot hurt me. Fortune, in fact, can encompass us
					with sickness, take away our possessions, slander us
					to people or despot; but she cannot make the good
					and valiant and high-souled man base or cowardly,
					mean, ignoble, or envious, nor can she deprive us of
					that disposition, the constant presence of which is of
					more help in facing life than is a pilot in facing the
					sea. For a pilot cannot calm a savage wave or a
					wind, nor can he find a harbour wherever he wishes at
					need, nor can he await the event confidently and
					
					 
					
					without trembling; as long as he has not despaired,
					making use of his skill,
					 
 With the mainsail dropped to the lower mast
						 
 He flees from the murky sea, 
 
 
					whereas when the sea towers over him, he sits there
					quaking and trembling. But the disposition of the
					wise man yields the highest degree of calm to his
					bodily affections, destroying by means of self-control,
					temperate diet, and moderate exertion the conditions
					leading to disease; even if the beginning of some
					evil comes from without, he rides it out with light
						and well-furled sail, as Asclepiades has it, just as
					one passes through a storm. But if some great unforeseen disaster comes upon him and masters him,
					the harbour is close at hand and he may swim away
					from his body, as from a leaky boat.

For it is the fear of death, not the desire for
					life, which makes the fool dependent on his body,
					clinging to it as Odysseus did to the fig-tree through
					fear of Charybdis below,
					 Where breezes let him neither stay nor sail, 
 
					so that he is displeased at this and fearful of that.
					
					 
					
					But he who understands somehow or other the nature
					of the soul and reflects that the change it undergoes
					at death will be for the better, or at least not for the
					worse, has no small provision to secure tranquillity
					of mind for facing life - fearlessness towards death.
					For he who can live pleasantly when the agreeable
					and congenial part of life is in the ascendant, but
					when alien and unnatural principles prevail, can
					depart fearlessly, saying,
					 The god himself shall free me, when I will, 
 
					what can we imagine might befall such a man as this
					that would vex or trouble or disturb him? For he 
					who said, I have anticipated you, Fortune, and
						taken from you every entry whereby you might get
						at me, encouraged himself, not with bolts or keys
					or battlements, but by precepts and reasoning in
					which everyone who desires may share. And one
					must not despair or disbelieve any of these arguments,
					but should admire and emulate them and, being filled
					with their inspiration, make trial of oneself and observe oneself in smaller matters with a view to the
					greater, not avoiding or rejecting from the soul the
					care of these things, nor taking refuge in the remark,
					 Perhaps nothing will be more difficult than this. 
					For languor and flabby softness are implanted by that
					self-indulgence of the soul which ever occupies itself
					with the easiest way, and retreats from the undesirable
					to what is most pleasant. But the soul which endeavours, by study and the severe application of its
					
					 
					
					powers of reasoning, to form an idea of what sickness,
					suffering, and exile really are will find much that
					is false and empty and corrupt in what appears to
					be difficult and fearful, as the reason shows in each
					particular.

And yet many shudder even at the verse of
					Menander, 
					 No man alive may say, I shall not suffer this, 
 
					since they do not know how much it helps in warding
					off grief to be able by practice and study to look
					Fortune in the face with eyes open, and not to manufacture in oneself smooth, soft 
 fancies, like one
					reared in the shade of many hopes which ever yield
					and hold firm against nothing. We can, however,
					make this reply to Menander: True,
						 No man alive may say, I shall not suffer this, 
 
						yet while still alive one can say, I will not do this: I
							will not lie nor play the villain nor defraud nor
							scheme. 
 For this is in our power and is not a
					small, but a great help toward tranquillity of mind.
					Even as, on the contrary again,
					 My conscience, since I know I’ve done a dreadful deed, 
 
					like an ulcer in the flesh, leaves behind it in the soul
					regret which ever continues to wound and prick it.
					For the other pangs reason does away with, but
					
					 
					
					regret is caused by reason itself, since the soul, together with its feeling of shame, is stung and chastised
					by itself. For as those who shiver with ague or burn
					with fevers are more distressed and pained than those
					who suffer the same discomforts through heat or cold
					from a source outside the body, so the pangs which
					Fortune brings, coming, as it were, from a source
					without, are lighter to bear; but that lament,
					 None is to blame for this but me myself, 
 
					which is chanted over one’s errors, coming as it
					does from within, makes the pain even heavier by
					reason of the disgrace one feels. And so it is that no
					costly house nor abundance of gold nor pride of race
					nor pomp of office, no grace of language, no eloquence,
					impart so much calm and serenity to life as does a soul
					free from evil acts and purposes and possessing an
					imperturbable and undefiled character as the source
					of its life, a source whence flow fair actions which
					have both an inspired and joyous activity joined with
					a lofty pride therein, and a memory sweeter and more
					stable than that hope of Pindar’s which sustains old
					age. For do not censers, Carneades said, even if
					they have been completely emptied, retain their
					
					 
					
					fragrance for a long time, and in the soul of the
					wise man do not fair actions leave behind the remembrance of them eternally delightful and fresh,
					by which joy in them is watered and flourishes, and
					he comes to despise those who bewail and abuse life
					as a land of calamities or a place of exile appointed
					here for our souls?

And I am delighted with Diogenes, who, when
					he saw his host in Sparta preparing with much ado
					for a certain festival, said, Does not a good man
						consider every day a festival? And a very
					splendid one, to be sure, if we are sound of mind.
					For the universe is a most holy temple and most
					worthy of a god; into it man is introduced through
					birth as a spectator, not of hand-made or immovable
					images, but of those sensible representations of
					knowable things that the divine mind, says Plato, has
					revealed, representations which have innate within
					themselves the beginnings of life and motion, sun and
					moon and stars, rivers which ever discharge fresh
					water, and earth which sends forth nourishment for
					plants and animals. Since life is a most perfect
					initiation into these things and a ritual celebration of
					them, it should be full of tranquillity and joy, and not
					in the manner of the vulgar, who wait for the festivals
					of Cronus and of Zeus and the Panathenaea and
					other days of the kind, at which to enjoy and refresh
					themselves, paying the wages of hired laughter to
					mimes and dancers. It is true that we sit there on
					
					 
					
					those occasions decorously in reverent silence, for no
					one wails while he is being initiated or laments as he
					watches the Pythian games or as he drinks at the
					festival of Cronus; but by spending the greater part
					of life in lamentation and heaviness of heart and
					carking cares men shame the festivals with which the
					god supplies us and in which he initiates us. And
					though men delight in sweetly sounding instruments
					and singing birds, and take pleasure in seeing animals
					romping and frisking, and, on the contrary, are displeased when they howl and bellow and look fierce;
					yet though they see that their own life is unsmiling
					and dejected and ever oppressed and afflicted by the
					most unpleasant experiences and troubles and unending cares, they not only do not provide themselves with some alleviation or ease-from what
					source could they do so? - but even when others urge
					them, they do not accept a word of admonition by
					following which they would acquiesce in the present
					without fault-finding, remember the past with thankfulness, and meet the future without fear or suspicion,
					with their hopes cheerful and bright.