Water is best, and gold, like a blazing fire in the night, stands out
 supreme of all lordly wealth. But if, my heart, you wish to sing of
 contests,

look no further for any star warmer than the sun, shining by day
 through the lonely sky, and let us not proclaim any contest greater than
 Olympia . From there glorious
 song enfolds the wisdom of poets, so that they loudly sing

the son of Cronus, when they arrive at the rich and blessed hearth of
 Hieron,

who wields the scepter of law in Sicily of many flocks, reaping every excellence at its
 peak, and is glorified

by the choicest music, which we men often play around his hospitable
 table. Come, take the Dorian lyre down from its peg, if the splendor of
 Pisa and of Pherenicus placed
 your mind under the influence of sweetest thoughts,

when that horse ran swiftly beside the Alpheus, not needing to be
 spurred on in the race, and brought victory to his master,

the king of Syracuse who delights in horses. His glory shines in the
 settlement of fine men founded by Lydian Pelops,

with whom the mighty holder of the earth Poseidon fell in love, when
 Clotho took him out of the pure cauldron, furnished with a gleaming ivory
 shoulder. Yes, there are many marvels, and yet I suppose the speech of
 mortals beyond the true account can be deceptive, stories adorned with
 embroidered lies;

and Grace, who fashions all gentle things for men, confers esteem and
 often contrives to make believable the unbelievable. But the days to come
 are the wisest witnesses.

It is seemly for a man to speak well of the gods; for the blame is
 less that way. Son of Tantalus, I will speak of you, contrary to earlier
 stories. When your father invited the gods to a very well-ordered banquet at
 his own dear Sipylus, in return for the meals he had enjoyed,

then it was that the god of the splendid trident seized you,

his mind overcome with desire, and carried you away on his team of
 golden horses to the highest home of widely-honored Zeus, to which at a
 later time Ganymede came also,

to perform the same service for Zeus. But when you disappeared, and
 people did not bring you back to your mother, for all their searching, right
 away some envious neighbor whispered that they cut you limb from limb with a
 knife into the water's rolling boil over the fire,

and among the tables at the last course they divided and ate your
 flesh.

For me it is impossible to call one of the blessed gods a glutton. I
 stand back from it. Often the lot of evil-speakers is profitlessness. If
 indeed the watchers of Olympus ever
 honored a mortal man,

that man was Tantalus. But he was not able to digest his great
 prosperity, and for his greed he gained overpowering ruin, which the Father
 hung over him: a mighty stone. Always longing to cast it away from his head,
 he wanders far from the joy of festivity.

He has this helpless life of never-ending labor,

a fourth toil after three others, because he stole from the gods
 nectar and ambrosia, with which they had made him immortal, and gave them to
 his drinking companions. If any man expects that what he does escapes the
 notice of a god, he is wrong.

Because of that the immortals sent the son of Tantalus back again to
 the swift-doomed race of men. And when he blossomed with the stature of fair
 youth, and down darkened his cheek, he turned his thoughts to an available
 marriage,

to win glorious Hippodameia from her father, the lord of Pisa . He drew near to the gray sea,
 alone in the darkness, and called aloud on the deep-roaring god, skilled
 with the trident; and the god appeared to him, close at hand.

Pelops said to the god, “If the loving gifts of Cyprian Aphrodite
 result in any gratitude, Poseidon, then restrain the bronze spear of
 Oenomaus, and speed me in the swiftest chariot to Elis , and bring me to victory. For he
 has killed thirteen

suitors, and postpones the marriage

of his daughter. Great danger does not take hold of a coward. Since
 all men are compelled to die, why should anyone sit stewing an inglorious
 old age in the darkness, with no share of any fine deeds? As for me, on this
 contest

I will take my stand. May you grant a welcome achievement.” So he
 spoke, and he did not touch on words that were unaccomplished. Honoring him,
 the god gave him a golden chariot, and horses with untiring wings.

He overcame the might of Oenomaus, and took the girl as his bride.
 She bore six sons, leaders of the people eager for excellence.

Now he has a share in splendid blood-sacrifices, resting beside the
 ford of the Alpheus, where he has his attendant tomb beside the altar that
 is thronged with many visitors. The fame of Pelops shines from afar in the
 races of the Olympic festivals,

where there are contests for swiftness of foot, and the bold heights
 of toiling strength. A victor throughout the rest of his life enjoys honeyed
 calm,

so far as contests can bestow it. But at any given time the glory of
 the present day

is the highest one that comes to every mortal man. I must crown that
 man with the horse-song in the Aeolian strain. I am convinced that there is
 no host in the world today who is both knowledgeable about fine things and
 more sovereign in power,

whom we shall adorn with the glorious folds of song. A god is set
 over your ambitions as a guardian, Hieron, and he devises with this as his
 concern. If he does not desert you soon, I hope that I will celebrate an
 even greater sweetness,

sped by a swift chariot, finding a helpful path of song when I come
 to the sunny hill of Cronus. For me the Muse tends her mightiest shaft of
 courage. Some men are great in one thing, others in another; but the peak of
 the farthest limit is for kings. Do not look beyond that!

May it be yours to walk on high throughout your life, and mine to
 associate with victors as long as I live, distinguished for my skill among
 Greeks everywhere.

Songs, rulers of the lyre, what god, what hero, what man shall we
 celebrate? Indeed, Pisa belongs to
 Zeus; and Heracles established the Olympic festival, as the finest trophy of
 battle;

and Theron must be proclaimed because of his victorious four-horse
 chariot, Theron who is just in his regard for guests, and is the bulwark of
 Acragas, the strength of the city, the choicest bloom of illustrious
 ancestors,

who labored much with their spirits, and won a sacred home by the
 river, and were

the eye of Sicily ; their
 allotted lifetime attended them, bringing wealth and grace to their inborn
 excellence. But you, son of Cronus and Rhea, who rule over your home on
 Olympus , and over the foremost
 of festivals, and over the ford of Alpheus, be warmed by our songs and
 graciously preserve their ancestral land

for their future generations. When deeds have been accomplished,
 whether justly or contrary to justice, not even Time the father of all
 things could undo the outcome. But forgetfulness may come, with favorable
 fortune. Under the power of noble joys, malignant pain

is subdued and dies,

whenever god-sent Fate lifts prosperity on high. This saying applies
 to the daughters of Cadmus on their lovely thrones: they suffered greatly,
 but their heavy sorrow collapsed in the presence of greater blessings.

Long-haired Semele, who died in the roar of the thunderbolt, lives
 among the Olympians; Pallas is her constant friend, and indeed so is father
 Zeus, and she is loved by her ivy-crowned son.

And they say that even in the sea, among the ocean-daughters of
 Nereus, immortal life

is granted to Ino for all time. Truly, for mortal men at least, the
 time when we will reach the limit of death is by no means fixed, nor when we
 will bring a peaceful day, the sun's child, to an end in unworried
 well-being. But at various times various currents, both of pleasure and of
 toil, come to men.

In such a way does Fate, who keeps their pleasant fortune to be
 handed from father to son, bring at another time some painful reversal
 together with god-sent prosperity, since the destined son met and killed
 Laius, and fulfilled the oracle of Pytho ,

spoken long before.

But the sharp-eyed Erinys saw it, and destroyed his warlike sons
 through mutual slaughter. Yet Polyneices, when laid low, left behind him a
 son, Thersander, honored in youthful contests and in the battles of war,

a scion to defend the house of the descendants of Adrastus. And it is
 fitting that the son of Aenesidamus, whose roots grew from that seed, should
 meet with songs of praise and with the lyre.

For in Olympia he
 himself received a prize of honor; at Pytho

and at the Isthmus, the Graces who love them both brought garlands of
 flowers to his equally blessed brother for his four-horse team, victorious
 in the twelve courses of the race. To attempt a contest and be successful
 brings release from sadness. Wealth adorned with excellence brings many
 opportunities, rousing deep wild ambitions;

it is a brilliant star, a man's true light, at least if one has and
 knows the future, that the reckless souls of those who have died on earth
 immediately pay the penalty—and for the crimes committed in this realm of
 Zeus there is a judge below the earth; with hateful

compulsion he passes his sentence.

But having the sun always in equal nights and equal days, the good
 receive a life free from toil, not scraping with the strength of their arms
 the earth, nor the water of the sea,

for the sake of a poor sustenance. But in the presence of the honored
 gods, those who gladly kept their oaths enjoy a life without tears, while
 the others undergo a toil that is unbearable to look at.

Those who have persevered three times, on either side, to keep their
 souls free from all wrongdoing,

follow Zeus' road to the end, to the tower of Cronus, where ocean
 breezes blow around the island of the blessed, and flowers of gold are
 blazing, some from splendid trees on land, while water nurtures others. With
 these wreaths and garlands of flowers they entwine their hands

according to the righteous counsels of Rhadamanthys, whom the great
 father, the husband of Rhea whose throne is above all others, keeps close
 beside him as his partner. Peleus and Cadmus are counted among them, and
 Achilles who was brought there by his mother, when she had

persuaded the heart of Zeus with her prayers—

Achilles, who laid low Hector, the irresistible, unswerving pillar of
 Troy , and who consigned to
 death Memnon the Ethiopian, son of the Dawn. I have many swift arrows in the
 quiver under my arm,

arrows that speak to the initiated. But the masses need interpreters.
 The man who knows a great deal by
 nature is truly skillful, while those who have only learned chatter with
 raucous and indiscriminate tongues in vain like crows

against the divine bird of Zeus. Now, bend your bow toward the mark;
 tell me, my mind, whom are we trying to hit

as we shoot arrows of fame from a gentle mind? I will aim at
 Acragas , and speak with true
 intent a word sworn by oath: no city for a hundred years has given birth to
 a man more beneficent in his mind or more generous with his hand

than Theron. But praise is confronted by greed, which is not
 accompanied by justice, but stirred up by depraved men, eager to babble and
 to bury the fine deeds of noble men. Since the sand of the shore is beyond
 all counting,

who could number all the joys that Theron has given others?

I pray that I may be pleasing to the hospitable sons of Tyndareus and
 to Helen of the beautiful hair while I honor renowned Acragas by raising my
 song in praise of Theron's victory at Olympia , won by the choicest of horses with untiring feet.
 With this in view the Muse stood beside me when I found a shining new manner

of fitting the splendid voice of the victory procession to the Dorian
 sandal.

For the garlands twined around his hair exact from me this sacred
 debt, to blend harmoniously for the son of Aenesidamus the embroidered song
 of the lyre and the cry of the flutes with the arrangement of words, and
 Pisa bids me to raise my
 voice— Pisa , from which

god-fated songs come often to men,

for anyone over whose brow the strict Aetolian judge of the Greeks
 tosses up around his hair the gray-green adornment of olive leaves,
 fulfilling the ancient behests of Heracles; the olive which once the son of
 Amphitryon brought from the shady springs of the Danube ,

to be the most beautiful memorial of the Olympian contests,

when he had persuaded the Hyperborean people, the servants of Apollo,
 with speech. With trustworthy intentions he was entreating them for a shady
 plant, to be shared by all men and to be a garland of excellence in the
 grove of Zeus which is hospitable to all. For already the altars had been
 consecrated to his father, and in mid-month the full

evening's eye shone brightly, the Moon on her golden chariot,

and he had established the consecrated trial of the great games along
 with the four years' festival beside the sacred banks of the Alpheus. But
 Pelops' sacred ground was not flourishing with beautiful trees in the
 valleys below the hill of Cronus. He saw that this garden, bare of trees,
 was exposed to the piercing rays of the sun.

And so his spirit prompted him to travel to the land

of the Danube , where the
 horse-driving daughter of Leto had received him when he came from the
 mountain-glens and deep, winding valleys of Arcadia ; through the commands of Eurystheus, compulsion
 from his father urged him on the quest of the doe with the golden horns,
 which once Taÿgete

had inscribed as a sacred dedication to Artemis who sets things
 right.

Pursuing that doe he had also seen that land beyond the cold blasts
 of Boreas; there he had stood and marvelled at the trees, and sweet desire
 for them possessed him, to plant them around the boundary-line of the
 horse-racing ground with its twelve courses. And now in his kindness he
 comes regularly to this festival of ours, together with the godlike

twin sons of deep-waisted Leda.

For Heracles, when he ascended to Olympus , assigned to them the ordering of the marvellous
 contest of men, the contest in excellence and in the driving of swift
 chariots. And so my spirit somehow urges me to say that glory has come to
 the Emmenidae and to Theron through the dispensation of the sons of
 Tyndareus with their fine horses, because that family

comes to them with the most hospitable feasting-tables of any mortal
 men,

observing the rites of the blessed gods with pious thoughts. If water
 is best and gold is the most honored of all possessions, so now Theron
 reaches the farthest point by his own native excellence; he touches the
 pillars of Heracles. Beyond that the wise cannot set foot; nor can the
 unskilled set foot

beyond that. I will not pursue it; I would be a fool.

Charioteer of the thundercloud with untiring feet, highest Zeus! Your
 Seasons, whirling to the embroidered notes of the lyre's song, sent me as a
 witness of the most lofty games. When friends are successful, the noble
 immediately smile on

the sweet announcement. Son of Cronus, you who hold Aetna , the wind-swept weight on terrible
 hundred-headed Typhon, receive, for the sake of the Graces, this Olympic
 victory-procession,

this most enduring light of widely powerful excellence. For the
 procession comes in honor of Psaumis' chariot; Psaumis, who, crowned with
 the olive of Pisa , hurries to
 rouse glory for Camarina. May the god be gracious to his future prayers,
 since I praise a man who is most eager in the raising of horses,

who rejoices in being hospitable to all guests, and whose pure
 thoughts are turned towards city-loving peace. I will not stain my words
 with lies. Perseverance is what puts men to the test,

and what saved the son of Clymenus

from the contempt of the Lemnian women. He won the foot race in
 bronze armor, and said to Hypsipyle as he went to take the garland: “Such is
 my swiftness;

and I have hands and heart to match. Even on young men gray hair
 often grows, even before the expected age.”

Daughter of Ocean, with a smiling heart receive the sweet bloom of
 lofty excellence and Olympian garlands, the gifts of Psaumis and of his mule
 car team with untiring feet.

Psaumis who, exalting your city, Camarina, which cares for its people,

honored the six double altars, at the greatest festivals of the gods,
 with the sacrifice of oxen and in contests on the fifth day,

contests of horse teams, and mule teams, and of riding the single
 horse. To you he has dedicated rich renown by his victory, and he had his
 father Acron and his new-founded home proclaimed by the herald.

Coming from the lovely homes of Oenomaus and of Pelops,

he sings of your sacred grove, Pallas protector of the city, and of
 the river Oanis, and the local lake,

and the sacred canals with which Hipparis waters its people, and
 swiftly builds a tall-standing grove of steadfast dwellings, bringing this
 host of citizens out of helplessness into the light.

Always, when it is a question of excellence, toil and expense strive
 to accomplish a deed that is shrouded in danger; those who are successful
 seem wise, even to their fellow-citizens.

Savior Zeus, high in the clouds, you who dwell on the hill of Cronus
 and honor the wide-flowing Alpheus and the sacred cave of Ida! I come as
 your suppliant, singing to the sound of Lydian flutes,

entreating you to adorn this city with glorious hosts of noble men;
 and that you, Psaumis the Olympic victor, delighting in the horses of
 Poseidon, may carry on to the end a pleasurable old age

with your sons standing beside you. If a man cultivates both
 prosperity and health, being generous with his possessions and winning
 praise as well, let him not seek to become a god.

Raising the fine-walled
 porch of our dwelling with golden pillars, we will build, as it were, a
 marvellous hall; at the beginning of our work we must place a far-shining
 front. If someone were an Olympic victor,

and a guardian of the prophetic altar of Zeus at Pisa , and a fellow-founder of renowned
 Syracuse, what hymn of praise would that man fail to win, by finding
 fellow-citizens ungrudging in delightful song?

Let the son of Sostratus know that this sandal fits his
 divinely-blessed foot. But excellence without danger

is honored neither among men nor in hollow ships. But many people
 remember, if a fine thing is done with toil. Hagesias, that praise is ready
 for you, which once Adrastus' tongue rightly spoke for the seer Amphiaraus,
 son of Oicles, when the earth swallowed up him and his shining horses.

In Thebes , when the
 seven pyres of corpses had been consumed, the son of Talaus spoke in this
 way: “I long for the eye of my army, a man who was good both as a prophet
 and at fighting with the spear.” And this holds good as well for the man of
 Syracuse who is master of our victory-procession. Though I am not prone to
 quarrel, and not overly fond of victory,

I would even swear a great oath, and on this point at least I will
 clearly bear witness for him; and the honey-voiced Muses will give their
 consent.

Phintis, come now and yoke the strength of mules for me, quickly, so
 that we can drive the chariot along a clear path, and I can at last arrive
 at the race of these men.

For those mules above all others know how to lead the way along this
 path, since they have won garlands at Olympia . And so it is right to open for them the gates of
 song; and I must go today, in good time, to Pitana, beside the ford of
 Eurotas.

Pitana, who, it is said, lay with Poseidon son of Cronus,

and bore a child, violet-haired Evadne. But she hid her unwedded
 pregnancy in the folds of her robe. And in the appointed month she sent
 servants, and told them to give the baby to be tended by the hero, Aepytus
 son of Eilatus, who ruled over the Arcadians at Phaesana, and had his
 allotted home on the Alpheus,

where Evadne was raised, and first touched the sweets of Aphrodite
 beneath Apollo's embrace.

She did not escape the notice of Aepytus in all the time that she was
 hiding the offspring of the god; no, he went to Pytho , pressing down the unspeakable anger in his spirit
 with intense concern, to consult the oracle about this unbearable disaster.
 And she laid down her purple and saffron girdle,

and her silver pitcher, and beneath a blue-shaded thicket gave birth
 to a god-inspired boy. The golden-haired god sent gentle-minded Eleithuia
 and the Fates to help her.

From her womb and her sweet birth-pangs Iamus came right away into
 the light. In her distress,

she left him on the ground. But by the will of the gods, two
 gray-eyed serpents nurtured him with the harmless venom of bees, caring for
 him. And when the king had driven back from rocky Pytho , he questioned everyone in the
 household about the child whom Evadne had borne. For he said that he was
 begotten by Phoebus,

and that he would be, for men on earth, a prophet above all mortals,
 and that his race would never fail. Such was his speech. But they claimed
 that they had neither seen nor heard the baby, born four days ago. For it
 had been hidden in the rushes and the boundless thicket,

his tender body washed in the golden and purple light of violets.
 Therefore his mother declared that he should be called for all time

by this immortal name, “Iamus.” And when he had attained the
 delightful fruit of golden-crowned Youth, he went down into the middle of
 the Alpheus, and called on wide-ruling Poseidon, his grandfather, and on the
 Archer who watches over god-built Delos ,

praying that the honor of caring for the people be on his head, under
 the clear night sky. His father's voice responded in clear speech, and
 sought him out: “Rise, my son, and follow my voice here to a place that
 welcomes all.”

They came to the steep rock of the lofty hill of Cronus.

There the god gave him a double treasure of prophecy: there and then
 to hear a voice that did not know how to lie; and when bold-plotting
 Heracles came, the sacred scion of the Alcidae, and founded for his father a
 festival frequented by mortals and the greatest ritual of contests,

then he commanded him to establish an oracle on the highest altar of
 Zeus.

Since then the race of the sons of Iamus has been very famous
 throughout Greece . Prosperity
 attended them; and by honoring excellence, they walk along a bright path.
 Every action brings evidence. Envious blame from others hangs

over those who have once driven first down the final course of a
 race, and on whom honored Grace has shed glorious beauty. But if, Hagesias,
 it is true that the men on your mother's side, living below the boundaries
 of Cyllene,

piously gave many gifts, with prayers and sacrifices, to the herald
 of the gods, Hermes, who rules over games and the dispensation of contests,

and honors Arcadia , the
 home of fine men, it is that god, son of Sostratus, who with his
 loud-thundering father fulfills your good fortune. I think I have on my
 tongue a shrill whetstone, which steals over me (and I am willing) with
 fair-flowing breaths. My mother's mother was the nymph of Stymphalus,
 blossoming Metopa,

who bore horse-driving Thebe, whose delicious water I drink, while I
 weave my embroidered song for heroic spearmen. Now rouse your companions,
 Aeneas, first to shout the praises of Hera Parthenia, and then to know
 whether we have truly escaped the ancient reproach

of men's speech, “Boeotian pig.” For you are a faithful herald, a
 message-stick of the lovely-haired Muses, a sweet mixing-bowl of
 loud-sounding songs.

Tell them to remember Syracuse and Ortygia, which Hieron rules with
 his pure scepter and with good counsels,

while he attends on the worship of Demeter of the red feet, and on
 the festival of her daughter with her white horses, and on the might of
 Aetnaean Zeus. The sweet-voiced lyres and music are familiar with Hieron.
 May time not creep up and disturb his prosperity, but may he with loving
 friendliness welcome the victory-procession of Hagesias

as it comes to one home from his other home within the walls of
 Stymphalus,

leaving his motherland, Arcadia of the fine flocks. On a stormy night it is good to
 have two anchors to throw down from a swift ship. May a god lovingly bestow
 a glorious lot on the men of both cities. Master, ruler of the sea, husband
 of Amphitrite of the golden distaff, grant straight sailing free from
 troubles,

and give new growth to the delightful flower of my songs.

As when someone takes a goblet, all golden, the most prized of his
 possessions, foaming with the dew of the vine from a generous hand, and
 makes a gift of it to his young son-in-law, welcoming him with a toast from
 one home to another,

honoring the grace of the symposium and the new marriage-bond, and thereby, in the
 presence of his friends, makes him enviable for his harmonious marriage-bed;

I too, sending to victorious men poured nectar, the gift of the Muses,
 the sweet fruit of my mind, I try to win the gods' favor

for those men who were victors at Olympia and at Pytho . That man is prosperous, who is encompassed by good
 reports. Grace, which causes life to flourish, looks with favor now on one
 man, now on another, with both the sweet-singing lyre and the full-voiced
 notes of flutes.

And now, with the music of flute and lyre alike I have come to land
 with Diagoras, singing the sea-child of Aphrodite and bride of Helios,
 Rhodes,

so that I may praise this straight-fighting, tremendous man who had
 himself crowned beside the Alpheus and near Castalia, as a recompense for
 his boxing, and also his father Damagetus, a man pleasing to Justice, living
 on the island of three cities near the foreland of spacious Asia , among Argive spearmen.

I shall want to proclaim my message for them, the widely powerful
 race of Heracles, and tell correctly from the beginning, from Tlepolemus,
 the story that concerns all. For, on the father's side, they boast descent
 from Zeus, while, on the mother's, they are descendants of Amyntor, through
 Astydameia. But around the minds of men

countless errors loom; and this is impossible to discover:

what is best to happen to a man, now and in the end. For indeed,
 striking Licymnius, the bastard brother of Alcmena, with a staff of hard
 olive-wood as he came out of the chamber of Midea ,

the founder of this land once killed that man, in anger. Disturbances
 of the mind lead astray even a wise man. Tlepolemus went and sought the
 god's oracle.

To him the golden-haired god spoke, from his fragrant sanctuary, of a
 voyage by ship from the shore of Lerna straight to the pasture land with sea all around it,
 where once the great king of the gods showered the city with golden snow,

when, by the skills of Hephaestus with the bronze-forged hatchet,
 Athena leapt from the top of her father's head and cried aloud with a mighty
 shout. The Sky and mother Earth shuddered before her.

Then even the god that brings light to mortals, son of Hyperion,

enjoined his dear children to observe the obligation that was soon to
 be due: that they should be the first to build for the goddess an altar
 visible to all men, and by founding a sacred burnt-offering warm the spirit
 of the father and of the daughter who thunders with her spear. She who casts
 excellence and joys into men is the daughter of Forethought, Reverence.

Truly, a cloud of forgetfulness sometimes descends unexpectedly, and
 draws the straight path of action away from the mind. For they climbed the
 hill without bringing the seed of burning flame; and they established the
 sacred precinct on the acropolis with fireless sacrifices. Zeus brought to
 them a yellow cloud

and rained on them abundant gold. And the gray-eyed goddess herself
 bestowed on them

every art, so that they surpassed all mortal men as the best workers
 with their hands; and the roads bore works of art like living, moving
 creatures, and their fame was profound. For a wise craftsman, even superior
 skill is free from guile. The ancient stories of men tell

that when Zeus and the immortals were dividing the earth among them,
 Rhodes was not yet visible in the expanse of the sea, but the island was
 hidden in the salty depths.

Helios was absent, and no one marked out a share for him; in fact
 they left him without any allotment of land,

although he was a holy god. And when Helios mentioned it, Zeus was
 about to order a new casting of lots, but Helios did not allow him. For he
 said that he himself saw in the gray sea, growing from the bottom, a rich,
 productive land for men, and a kindly one for flocks.

And he bid Lachesis of the golden headband

raise her hands right away, and speak, correctly and earnestly, the
 great oath of the gods, and consent with the son of Cronus that that island,
 when it had risen into the shining air, should thereafter be his own prize
 of honor. And the essence of his words was fulfilled and turned out to be
 true. There grew from the waters of the sea

an island, which is held by the birthgiving father of piercing rays,
 the ruler of fire-breathing horses. And there he once lay with Rhodes, and
 begat seven sons who inherited from him the wisest minds in the time of
 earlier men; and of these one begat Cameirus, and Ialysus the eldest, and Lindus . Each had his own separate share
 of cities

in their threefold division of their father's land, and their
 dwelling-places were named after them.

There it is that a sweet recompense for his pitiful misfortune is
 established for Tlepolemus, the first leader of the Tirynthians, as for a
 god:

a procession of flocks for burnt sacrifice and the trial of contests.
 With the flowers from these Diagoras has had himself crowned twice, and at
 the renowned Isthmus four times, in his good fortune, and again and again at
 Nemea and in rocky Athens ;

and the prizes of the bronze shield in Argos and the works of art in Arcadia and Thebes are familiar with him, and the duly ordered contests

of the Boeotians, and Pellana and Aegina , where he was six times victor. And in Megara the list carved in stone gives
 no other account. But, Father Zeus, you who rule over the ridges of
 Atabyrium, grant honor to the hymn ordained in praise of an Olympian victor,

and to the man who has found excellence as a boxer, and grant to him
 honored grace

in the eyes of both citizens and strangers. For he walks a straight
 course on a road that hates arrogance, knowing clearly the sound prophetic
 wisdom of his good ancestors. Do not bury in obscurity the shared seed of
 Callianax. When the Eratidae are graced with victories, the city too holds
 festivities; but in a single space of apportioned time

the winds shift quickly from moment to moment.

Mother of golden-crowned contests, Olympia , queen of truth! where prophets, judging from
 burnt sacrifices, inquire of Zeus of the flashing thunderbolt, if he has any
 message to give concerning men

whose spirits are seeking to attain great excellence and a
 breathing-space from toils.

Accomplishment is granted to the prayers of men in gratitude for their
 piety. Well-wooded grove of Pisa 
 beside the Alpheus,

welcome this victory-procession and the garland we bring to the
 victor; the man who is attended by your splendid prize of honor has great
 glory forever. Some good things come to one man, some to another; with the
 favor of the gods, there are many paths of success.

Timosthenes, fortune has allotted you and your brother to the care of
 your ancestor Zeus, who made you renowned at Nemea , and made Alcimedon an Olympic victor beside the
 hill of Cronus. He was beautiful to look at, and his deeds did not belie his
 beauty

when by his victory in wrestling he had Aegina with her long oars
 proclaimed as his fatherland. There the savior Themis, seated beside Zeus
 the god of hospitality, is honored

more than among all other men. For when there is a heavy weight in
 the balance that sways many ways, to judge with a straight mind and not
 inopportunely

is a difficult struggle. But some ordinance of the immortals set up
 as a divine pillar for visitors of all kinds this sea-girt land—and may the
 dawning time to come never tire of fulfilling this—

guarded by the Dorian people since the time of Aeacus, whom
 wide-ruling Poseidon and the son of Leto, when they were about to build the
 crown of walls to encircle Ilium ,
 summoned as a fellow worker; for it was fated that when war arose,

in the city-destroying battles, that wall would breathe forth
 ravening smoke.

And three gray-green serpents, when the wall was newly built, tried
 to leap into it; two of them fell down, stunned, and gave up their lives,

and the third leapt up with a cry. Pondering this adverse omen,
 Apollo said right away: “ Pergamos 
 is taken, hero, through the works of your hands—so says a vision sent to me
 from the son of Cronus, loud-thundering Zeus—

not without your sons: the city will be destroyed with the first
 generation, and with the third.” The god spoke clearly, and then
 hurried on his way, driving to Xanthus , and to the Amazons with their fine horses, and to
 the Danube . And the wielder of the
 trident drove his swift chariot to the sea-washed Isthmus,

bringing Aeacus here on his golden horses,

and going to see the ridge of Corinth , famous for its feasts. But nothing can be equally
 delightful to all men. If I have, in my song, exalted the glory of Melesias
 for his training of beardless youths,

let envy not strike me with a rough stone. For I will tell how he
 himself won the same grace at Nemea , and later, among men, in the battle

of the pancratium. To teach

is easier for one who has knowledge himself. And it is foolish not to
 learn in advance; for the minds of those with no experience are
 insubstantial. Melesias, beyond all others, could speak of those deeds: what
 manner of training will advance a man who is going to win the most
 longed-for glory from the sacred games.

Now it is his honor that his thirtieth victory has been won for him
 by Alcimedon,

who, with divine good fortune, yet without falling short in his own
 manliness, thrust off from himself and onto the four limbs of other boys a
 hateful homecoming with contemptuous talk and a secret way back,

and breathed into his father's father the force that wrestles off old
 age. Hades is forgotten by a man with good accomplishments.

But I must awaken memory and tell

of the choicest victory of hands for the Blepsiads, who are now
 crowned with their sixth garland from the contests flourishing with leaves.
 Even the dead have a share in rites performed according to law; the dust
 does not cover

the good grace of their kinsmen.

Having heard the voice of Hermes' daughter, Angelia, 
 Iphion might tell Callimachus of the splendid adornment at Olympia , which Zeus gave to their
 race. May he be willing to grant noble deeds upon noble

deeds, and to ward off bitter diseases. I pray that, for the share of
 fine things allotted to them, Zeus may not cause the mind of Nemesis to
 waver; rather, may he grant a painless life, and thus give new growth to
 themselves and their city.

The resounding strain of Archilochus, the swelling thrice-repeated
 song of triumph, sufficed to lead Epharmostus to the hill of Cronus, in
 victory-procession with his dear companions.

But now, from the bow of the Muses who, shooting from afar, send a
 shower of such arrows of song as these on Zeus of the red lightning-bolt and
 on the sacred height of Elis ,
 which once the Lydian hero Pelops

won as the very fine dowry of Hippodameia.

And shoot a winged sweet arrow to Pytho ; for your words will not fall to the ground, short
 of the mark, when you trill the lyre in honor of the wrestling of the man
 from renowned Opus. Praise Opus and her son;

praise her whom Themis and her glorious daughter, the savior Eunomia,
 have received under their protection; she flourishes with excellence beside
 your stream, Castalia, and beside the Alpheus. From there the choicest
 garlands

glorify the famous mother-city of the Locrians with her splendid
 trees.

I am lighting up that dear city with fiery songs, and more swiftly
 than a spirited horse or a winged ship

I will send that message everywhere, so surely as I, by some destined
 skill, am cultivating the exquisite garden of the Graces; for they are the
 givers of delight, but men become brave and skillful by divine will.

For

how could Heracles have wielded his club against the trident, when
 Poseidon took his stand to guard Pylos , and pressed him hard, and Phoebus pressed him hard,
 attacking with his silver bow; nor did Hades keep his staff unmoved, with
 which he leads mortal bodies down to the hollow path

of the dead. My mouth, fling this story away from me! Since to speak
 evil of the gods is a hateful skill, and untimely boasting

is in harmony with madness.

Do not babble of such things now. Keep war and all battles apart from
 the immortals. But lend your tongue to the city of Protogeneia, where, by
 the ordinance of Zeus with the flashing thunderbolt, Pyrrha and Deucalion came down from
 Parnassus and made their first
 home, and without the marriage-bed

they founded a unified race of stone offspring, and the stones gave
 the people their name . Arouse for them a clear-sounding path of song; praise wine that is old, but
 praise the flowers of songs

that are new. They tell, indeed,

how the strength of the waters overwhelmed the dark earth; but by the
 skills of Zeus the ebbing tide suddenly drained off the flood. From these
 were descended your ancestors with their bronze shields,

young men sprung from the beginning from the stock of the daughters
 of Iapetus and from the powerful sons of Cronus, always a native line of
 kings,

until the ruler of Olympus 
 carried off the daughter of Opus from the land of the Epeians, and lay with
 her peacefully in the glens of Mount Maenalus, and brought her

to Locrus, so that age would not overtake him and lay the burden of
 childlessness on him. His bride was carrying in her womb the seed of the
 greatest god, and the hero rejoiced to see his adopted son, and gave him the
 same name as his mother's father, Opus,

a man beyond words in beauty and fine deeds. Locrus gave him a city
 and a people to govern,

and strangers came to him from Argos and Thebes , from Arcadia and Pisa 
 . But among the settlers he chiefly honored the son of Actor

and Aegina, Menoetius, whose son went with the Atreidae to the plain
 of Teuthras, and stood alone beside Achilles, when Telephus turned to flight
 the mighty Danaans, and attacked their ships beside the sea, to reveal to a
 man of understanding

the powerful mind of Patroclus. From that time forward, the son of
 Thetis exhorted him in deadly war

never to post himself far from his own man-subduing spear.

May I be a suitable finder of words as I move onward in the Muses'
 chariot; may boldness and all-embracing power attend me. Because of his
 friendship with my people and his excellence, I went to honor the Isthmian
 crowning of Lampromachus, when both he and Epharmostus were victors

on a single day. And then there were two other joyous victories at
 the gates of Corinth , and
 others won by Epharmostus in the vale of Nemea ; and at Argos he won glory in a contest of men, and as a boy at
 Athens . And at Marathon,
 when he was barred from competing with the beardless youths,

how he endured the contest for silver cups among the older men!
 Having subdued those men by the trick of quickly shifting balance without
 falling, with what a roar of applause did he pass through the ring, in his
 prime, and handsome, and having accomplished the finest deeds.

Again, among the Parrhasian people he was marvellous to look at, at
 the festival of Lycaean Zeus, and when at Pellana he carried off as his
 prize a warm remedy against chilly winds. The tomb of Iolaus bears witness
 for him, and also Eleusis by
 the sea, for his splendid achievements.

That which is inborn is always the best; but many men strive to win
 glory with excellence that comes from training. Anything in which a god has
 no part is none the worse for being quelled in silence. For some roads

lead farther than others, and a single occupation will not nourish
 us all. The paths to skill are steep; but, while offering this prize of
 song, boldly shout aloud

that this man, by the blessing of the gods, was born with deftness
 of hand and litheness of limb, and with valor in his eyes; and at the
 banquet of Aias son of Oileus he laid his victorious garland on the altar.

Read me the name of the Olympic victor, the son of Archestratus, where
 it has been written in my mind. For I owed him a sweet song, and I have
 forgotten. But come, Muse, you and the daughter of Zeus, unforgetting Truth:
 with the hand that puts things right,

keep from me the blame for lying, for wronging my friend.

Approaching from far away, the future has arrived and made me ashamed
 of my deep debt. Still, payment with interest has a way of dissolving the
 bitter reproach of men.

Now, just as the flowing wave overwhelms the rolling pebble, so shall
 I pay my account in full, in gratitude and friendship.

For unswerving Exactitude rules the city of the Western Locrians, and
 Calliope is important to them, and bronze-armored Ares.

Battle with Cycnus set back even Heracles, strong and violent; let
 Hagesidamus, victorious as a boxer at Olympia , offer thanks to Ilas, just as Patroclus did to
 Achilles.

With the help of a god, one man can sharpen another who is born for
 excellence, and encourage him to tremendous achievement.

Without toil only a few have attained joy, a light of life above all
 labors. The laws of Zeus urge me to sing of that extraordinary contest-place
 which Heracles founded by the ancient tomb of Pelops

with its six altars, after he killed Cteatus, the flawless son of
 Poseidon

and Eurytus too, with a will to exact from the unwilling Augeas,
 strong and violent, the wages for his menial labor.

Heracles lay in wait in the thicket below Cleonae, and in his turn
 overcame those men by the roadside; for once before those arrogant Moliones
 had destroyed his Tirynthian army, when it was encamped in the valley of
 Elis .

And indeed it was not much later before the man who betrayed his
 friend,

the king of the Epeians, saw his land with all its possessions, his
 own city, sink into a deep channel of destruction beneath unyielding fire
 and blows of iron. A fight with a stronger man

is impossible to push away. So even he, by his own senselessness,
 last of all found himself captured and did not escape sheer destruction.

But the brave son of Zeus gathered the entire army and all the spoils
 together in Pisa

and measured out a sacred precinct for his supreme father. He
 enclosed the Altis all around and marked it off in the open, and he made the
 encircling area a resting-place for feasting, honoring the stream of the
 Alpheus

along with the twelve ruling gods.

And he called it the Hill of Cronus; it had been nameless before,
 while Oenomaus was king, and it was covered with wet snow. But in this rite
 of first birth the Fates stood close by, and the one who alone puts genuine
 truth to the test,

Time. Time moved forward and told the clear and precise story, how
 Heracles divided the gifts of war and sacrificed the finest of them, and how
 he established the four years' festival with the first Olympic games and its
 victories.

Who won the first garland, with the skill of his hands or feet or
 chariot, setting the boast of victory in his mind and achieving it with his
 deeds?

In the foot race the best at running the straight course

with his feet was the son of Licymnius, Oeonus, who had come from
 Midea at the head of an army.
 In wrestling, Echemus won glory for Tegea . And the prize in boxing was won by Doryclus, who
 lived in the city of Tiryns .
 And in the four-horse chariot

the victor was Samos of
 Mantinea , the son of
 Halirhothius. Phrastor hit the mark with the javelin. Niceus sent the stone
 flying from his circling arm beyond all the others, and his fellow soldiers
 raised a sudden burst of loud cheering.

The lovely light of the moon's beautiful face lit up the evening

and in the delightful festivities the whole precinct rang with a song
 in praise of victory. Even now we will follow the first beginnings, and as a
 namesake song of proud victory, we will shout of the thunder

and the fire-wrought shaft of Zeus who rouses the thunder-clap, the
 burning bolt that suits omnipotence. Swelling music will answer the
 reed-pipe in songs

which have come to light beside famous Dirce, after a long time, but
 like a long-desired child from the wife of a man who has already reached the
 opposite of youth, who fills his father's mind with the warmth of love;
 since his wealth falling into the hands of a stranger who is master of
 another home

is the most hateful thing to a dying man.

And, Hagesidamus, when a man with fine achievements but no songs
 reaches the house of Hades, he has spent his strength and his breath in vain
 and gained only a short-lived delight with his effort. But on you the
 soft-singing lyre and the sweet flute scatter grace

and the Pierian daughters of Zeus nurture your wide fame.

While I, earnestly lending my hand, have embraced the famous tribe of
 the Locrians, showering with honey their city of fine men. And I praised the
 lovely son of Archestratus,

whom I saw at that time beside the Olympic altar, winning victory
 with the valor of his hands—beautiful in form, and blended with that
 youthful bloom which once

kept Ganymede from shameless death, with the help of Cyprian
 Aphrodite.

There is a time when men's need for winds is the greatest, and a time
 for waters from the sky, the rainy offspring of clouds. But when anyone is
 victorious through his toil, then honey-voiced odes

become the foundation for future fame, and a faithful pledge for great
 deeds of excellence.

This praise is dedicated to Olympian victors, without stint. My tongue
 wants to foster such themes;

but it is by the gift of a god that a man flourishes with a skillful
 mind, as with anything else. For the present rest assured, Hagesidamus son
 of Archestratus: for the sake of your boxing victory,

I shall loudly sing a sweet song, an adornment for your garland of
 golden olive,

while I honor the race of the Western Locrians. There, Muses, join in
 the victory-song; I shall pledge my word to you that we will find there a
 race that does not repel the stranger, or is inexperienced in fine deeds,
 but one that is wise and warlike too. For

neither the fiery fox nor loud-roaring lions change their nature.

I entreat you, child of Zeus the Deliverer, saving Fortune, keep
 protecting Himera, and make her powerful. For by your favor swift ships are
 steered on the sea, and on dry land rushing battles

and assemblies where counsel is given. But men's expectations are
 often tossed up and then back down, as they cleave the waves of vain
 falsehood.

Never yet has any man on earth found a reliable token of what will
 happen from the gods. Our understanding of the future is blind.

And therefore many things fall out for men contrary to their
 judgement, bringing to some reversal of delight, while others, having
 encountered grievous storms, in a short time exchange their troubles for
 high success.

Son of Philanor, truly, like a cock that fights at home, even

the fame of your swift feet would have shed its leaves ingloriously
 beside your native hearth, if hostile civil strife had not deprived you of
 your Cnossian fatherland. But as things are, Ergoteles, having been crowned
 with garlands at Olympia , and
 twice from Pytho , and at the
 Isthmus, you exalt the hot baths of the Nymphs, while keeping company with
 them beside your own fields.

While I praise a house that has been three times victorious at
 Olympia , gentle to her own
 citizens, and hospitable to strangers, I shall recognize prosperous Corinth,

the portal of Isthmian Poseidon, glorious in her young men. There
 dwell Eunomia and her sisters, the secure foundation of cities:
 Dike, and Eirene, who was raised together with her, the
 guardians of wealth for men, the golden daughters of wise Themis.

They are resolute in repelling

Hybris, the bold-tongued mother of Koros . I have fine things to
 tell, and straightforward boldness urges my tongue to speak. It is
 impossible to conceal one's inborn nature. As for you, sons of Aletes, often
 the Seasons have sent you victorious splendor

for your consummate excellence when you won in sacred contests, and
 often into the hearts of men

the Seasons rich in flowers have cast ancient inventiveness. But the
 fame for every work is due to its inventor. Whence did the graces of
 Dionysus first come to light, with the ox-driving dithyramb?

Who invented the bridle for the harness of horses, or placed the
 double king of birds on top of the temples of gods? And in Corinth the sweet-breathing Muse
 blossoms, and also Ares, with the deadly spears of young men.

Highest lord

of Olympia , ruling far
 and wide; for all time, father Zeus, may you be ungrudging of our words, and
 ruling this people in safety, grant a straight course to the fair wind of
 Xenophon's good fortune. Receive the ordained song of praise in honor of his
 garlands, the procession which he leads from the plains of Pisa ,

since he has been victorious in both the pentathlon and the foot
 race; he has attained what no mortal man has ever attained before.

Two wreaths of wild celery crowned him, when he appeared at the
 Isthmian festival; and Nemea does
 not speak differently.

The brilliance of his father Thessalus' feet is stored up by the
 streams of the Alpheus, and at Pytho he has honor for the single and the double foot race
 within the circuit of a single day's sun; and in the same month, in rocky
 Athens , one swift-footed
 day placed three very beautiful prizes on his head,

and the games of Athena Hellotis give him seven victories. In the
 games of Poseidon between the two seas, the songs would be too long that
 could tell of all the victories won by Terpsias and Eritimus, with their
 father Ptoeodorus. And as for all the times you were best at Delphi , and in the lion's pastures, I
 am ready to contend with many

over the number of your honors; for, truly, I would not know how to
 give a clear account of the number of pebbles in the sea.

Each thing has its limit; knowing it is the best and most timely way.
 And I, sailing on my own course for the common good,

and singing of the wisdom and the battles of ancient men in their
 heroic excellence, shall not falsify the story of Corinth; I shall tell of
 Sisyphus, who, like a god, was very shrewd in his devising, and of Medea,
 who resolved on her own marriage against her father's will, and thus saved
 the ship Argo and its seamen.

And again, in the fight long ago before the walls of Dardanus,
 Corinthians seemed to decide the issue of battles on either side: some of
 them attempting, with the dear race of Atreus, to recover Helen, and others
 doing everything they could

to oppose the attempt. And the Danaans trembled before Glaucus, when
 he came from Lycia ; he boasted to
 them that in the city of Peirene lay the rule and rich estate and hall of
 his ancestor, Bellerophon,

who once suffered greatly when beside the spring he wanted to harness
 Pegasus, the son of the snake-entwined Gorgon;

until the maiden Pallas brought to him a bridle with golden
 cheek-pieces. The dream suddenly became waking reality, and she spoke: “Are
 you sleeping, king, son of Aeolus? Come, take this charm for the horse; and,
 sacrificing a white bull, show it to your ancestor, Poseidon the
 Horse-Tamer.”

The goddess of the dark aegis seemed to say such words to him as he
 slumbered in the darkness, and he leapt straight up to his feet. He seized
 the marvellous thing that lay beside him, and gladly went to the seer of the
 land,

and he told the son of Coeranus the whole story: how, at the seer's
 bidding, he had gone to sleep for the night on the altar of the goddess, and
 how the daughter herself of Zeus whose spear is the thunderbolt had given
 him

the spirit-subduing gold. The seer told him to obey the dream with
 all speed;

and, when he sacrificed a strong-footed bull to the widely powerful
 holder of the earth, straightaway to dedicate an altar to Athena, goddess of
 horses. The power of the gods accomplishes as a light achievement what is
 contrary to oaths and expectations. And so mighty Bellerophon eagerly

stretched the gentle charmed bridle around its jaws and caught

the winged horse. Mounted on its back and armored in bronze, at once
 he began to play with weapons. And with Pegasus, from the chilly bosom of
 the lonely air, he once attacked the Amazons, the
 female army of archers,

and he killed the fire-breathing Chimaera, and the Solymi. I shall
 pass over his death in silence; but Pegasus has found his shelter in the
 ancient stables of Zeus in Olympus 
 .

But I, while casting the whirling javelins with straight aim, must
 not miss the mark

as I speed many shafts with the strength of my hands. I have come as
 a willing champion of the Muses on their splendid thrones and of the race of
 Oligaethus. I shall make their many victories at the Isthmus and at
 Nemea manifest in a few
 words; and, as a truthful witness under oath,

the sweet-tongued cry of the noble herald, who announced their
 victories sixty times at both places, will confirm my words.

Their victories at Olympia seem to have already been mentioned; and of those
 in the future I could tell clearly when the time comes. For now I am
 hopeful, although a god controls

the outcome. If the good fortune of their family continues, we shall
 leave this to Zeus and Enyalius to accomplish. They won six times beneath
 the brow of Parnassus ; and all
 their victories in Argos and in
 Thebes , and all that shall
 be witnessed by the royal Lycaean altar that rules over the Arcadians,

and by Pellana, and Sicyon 
 , and Megara , the beautifully
 enclosed precinct of the Aeacidae,

and Eleusis and
 splendid Marathon, and the wealthy and beautiful cities beneath the high
 crest of Aetna , and Euboea—you may
 search through all Greece , and you
 will find that their victories are more than the eye can see. Come, swim
 away with agile feet!

Zeus the Accomplisher, grant reverence, and a sweet good fortune of
 delights.

You who have your home by the waters of Cephisus, who dwell in the
 town of beautiful horses: songful queens, Graces of splendid Orchomenus,
 guardians of the ancient race of Minyans,

hear me; I am praying. For with your help all delightful and sweet
 things are accomplished for mortals, if any man is skillful, or beautiful,
 or splendid. Not even the gods arrange dances or feasts without the holy
 Graces, who oversee everything

that is done in heaven; with their thrones set beside Pythian Apollo
 of the golden bow, they worship the everlasting honor of the Olympian
 father.

Lady Aglaia, and Euphrosyne, lover of dance and song, daughters of
 the strongest god,

listen now; and you, Thalia, passionate for dance and song, having
 looked with favor on this victory procession, stepping lightly in honor of
 gracious fortune. For I have come to sing of Asopichus in Lydian melodies
 and chosen phrases, because the Minyan land is victorious at Olympia ,

thanks to you. Now go, Echo, to the dark-walled home of Persephone
 and bring the glorious message to his father; when you see Cleodamus, tell
 him that his son, by the famous valley of Pisa , has wreathed his youthful hair with the wings of the
 renowned games.