LYCINUS 
Upon my word, Polystratus, those who saw the
Gorgon must have been affected by it very much as
I was recently when I saw a perfectly beautiful
woman: I was struck stiff with amazement and came
within an ace of being turned into stone, my friend,
just as it is in the fable!
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Heracles! An extraordinary spectacle, that, and
a terribly potent one, to astound Lycinus when it
was only a woman. To be sure you are very easily
affected in that way by boys, so that it would be a
simpler matter to move all Sipylus from its base
than to drag you away from your pretties and keep
you from standing beside them with parted lips, yes,
and not infrequently tears in your eyes, the very
image of the daughter of Tantalus. _ But tell me
about this petrifying Medusa, who she is and where
she comes from, so that we, too, may have a look at
her. You surely will not begrudge us the sight or
be jealous, if we ourselves are going to be struck
stiff at your elbow on seeing her!



 

 LYCINUS 
You may be very certain that if you get but a
distant view of her she will strike you dumb, and
more motionless than any statue. Yet the effect,
perhaps, is not so violent and the wound less serious
if it should be you who catch sight of her. But if
she should look at you as well, how shall you manage
to tear yourself away from her? She will fetter you
to herself and hale you off wherever she wishes,
doing just what the magnet does to iron.

POLYSTRATUS 
Don’t keep evoking fancies of miraculous loveliness, Lycinus, but tell me who the woman is.
 
 LYCINUS 
Why, do you suppose that I am exaggerating?
No, I am afraid that when you have seen her you
will take me to be a poor hand at turning compliments, so far superior will she prove to be.
Anyhow, I can’t say who she is, but she received
mich attention, kept splendid state in every way,
had a number of eunuchs and a great many maids,
and, in general, the thing seemed to be on a greater
scale than accords with private station.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
You didn’t learn even the name they gave her?
 
 LYCINUS 
No; only that she comes from Ionia, for one of
the onlookers glanced at his neighbour after she had
passed and said: “Well, that is what Smiyrna’s
beauties are like, and it is no wonder that the fairest

 

of Ionian cities has produced the fairest of women!”
It seemed to me that the speaker himself was of
Smyrna because he was so set up over her.

POLYSTRATUS 
Well, inasmuch as you really and truly behaved
like a stone in one way, at least, since you neither
followed her nor questioned that Smyrniote, whoever
he was, at least sketch her appearance in words as
best you can. Perhaps in that way I might
recognize her.
 
 LYCINUS 
Are you aware what you have demanded? It is
not in the power of words, not mine, certainly, to
call into being a portrait so marvellous, to which
hardly Apelles or Zeuxis or Parrhasius would have
seemed equal, or even perhaps a Phidias or an
Alcamenes. As for me, I shall but dim the lustre
of the original by the feebleness of my skill.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Nevertheless, Lycinus, what did she look like?
It would not be dangerously bold if you should show
your picture to a friend, no matter how well or ill it
may be drawn.
 
 LYCINUS 
But I think I shall act in a way that involves less
risk for myself if I call in some of those famous
artists of old for the undertaking, to model me a
statue of the woman.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
What do you mean by that? How can they come
to you when they died so many years ago?

 

 LYCINUS 
Easily, if only you do not refuse to answer me a
question or two.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
You have but to ask.

LYCINUS 
Were you ever in Cnidus, Polystratus ?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Yes indeed !
 
 LYCINUS 
Then you certainly saw the Aphrodite there ?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Yes, by Zeus! The fairest of the creations of
Praxiteles. 
 LYCINUS 
Well, have you also heard the story that the
natives tell about it—that someone fell in love with
the statue, was left behind unnoticed in the temple,
and embraced it to the best of his endeavours? But
no matter about that. _ Since you have seen her,
as you say, tell me whether you have also seen
the Aphrodite in the Gardens, at Athens, by
Alcamenes ? 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Surely I should be the laziest man in all the world




 

if I had neglected the most beautiful of the sculptures
of Alcamenes.
 
 LYCINUS 
One question, at all events, I shall not ask you,
Polystratus—whether you have often gone up to the
Acropolis to look at the Sosandra of Calamis ? 
 POLYSTRATUS 
I have often seen that, too.
 
 LYCINUS 
So far, so good. But among the works of Phidias
what did you praise most highly ?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
What could it be but the Lemnian Athena, on
which Phidias deigned actually to inscribe his
name? Qh, yes! and the Amazon who leans upon
her spear.

LYCINUS 
These are the most beautiful, my friend, so that
we shall not need any other artists. Come now, out
of them all I shall make a combination as best I can,
and shall display to you a single portrait-statue
that comprises whatever is most exquisite in each.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
How can that be done?




 

 LYCINUS 
Nothing hard about it, Polystratus, if from now
on we give Master Eloquence a free hand with those
statues and allow him to adapt, combine, and unite
them as harmoniously as he can, retaining at the
same time that composite effect and the variety.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Very well; by all means let him have a free hand
and show us his powers, for I am eager to know
what he really can do with the statues and how he
can combine so many into one without making it
discordant.

LYCINUS 
Well, he permits you to look upon the statue
even now, as it comes into being; and this is the
way he makes the blend. From the Cnidian he
takes only the head, as the body, which is unclothed,
will not meet his needs. He will allow the arrangement of the hair, the forehead, and the fair line of
the brows to remain as Praxiteles made them; and
in the eyes also, that gaze so liquid, and at the same
time so clear and winsome—that too shall be
retained as Praxiteles conceived it. But he will
take the round of the cheeks and all the fore part
of the face from Alcamenes and from Our Lady in
the Gardens; so too the hands, the graceful wrists,
and the supple, tapering fingers shall come from Our
Lady in the Gardens. But the contour of the entire
face, the delicate sides of it, and the shapely nose
will be supplied by the Lemnian Athena and by
Phidias, and the master will also furnish the meeting
of the lips, and the neck, taking these from his
Amazon. Sosandra and Calamis shall adorn her with

 

modesty, and her smile shall be grave and faint
like that of Sosandra, from whom shall come also the
simplicity and seemliness of her drapery, except that
she shall have her head uncovered. In the measure
of her years, whatever it may be, she shall agree
most closely with the Cnidian Aphrodite; that, too,
Praxiteles may determine.
What do you think, Polystratus? Will the statue
be beautiful?

POLYSTRATUS 
Yes, surely, when it has been completed to the
uttermost detail; for there is still, despite your
unexampled zeal, one beauty that you have left out
of your statue in collecting and combining everything
as you did.
 
 LYCINUS 
What is that ?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Not the most unimportant, my friend, unless you
will maintain that perfection of form is but little
enhanced by colour and appropriateness in each
detail, so that just those parts will be black which
should be black and those white which should be,
and the flush of life will glow upon the surface, and
so forth. I fear we still stand in need of the most
important feature !
 
 LYCINUS 
Where then can we get all that? Or shall
we call in the painters, of course, and particularly
those who excelled in mixing their colours and in
applying them judiciously? Come, then, let us call

 

in Polygnotus and Euphranor of old, and Apelles and
Aétion. Let them divide up the work, and let
Euphranor colour the hair as he painted Hera’s: 
let Polygnotus do the becomingness of her brows
and the faint flush of her cheeks, just as he did
Cassandra in the Lesche at Delphi, and let him also
do her clothing, which shall be of the most delicate
texture, so that it not only clings close where it
should, but a great deal of it floats in the air. The
body Apelles shall represent after the manner of his
Pacate, not too white but just suffused with red ;
and her lips shall be done by Aétion like Roxana’s. 
But stay!

We have Homer, the best of all painters,
éven in the presence of Euphranor and Apelles.
Let her be throughout of a colour like that which
Homer gave to the thighs of Menelaus when he
likened them to ivory tinged with crimson; and
let him also paint the eyes and make her “ox-eyed.”
The Theban poet, too, shall lend him a hand in the
work, to give her ‘violet brows.” Yes, and
Homer shall make her “laughter-loving” and
“white-armed" and “rosy-fingered,” and, in a word,
shall liken her to golden Aphrodite far more fittingly
than he did the daughter of Briseus.

This, then, is what sculptors and painters and
poets can achieve; but who could counterfeit the
fine flower of it all—the grace; nay, all the Graces
in company, and all the Loves, too, circling hand in
hand about her?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
It is a miraculous creature that you describe,
Lycinus; “dropt from the skies” in very truth,
quite like something out of Heaven. But what was
she doing when you saw her?
 
 LYCINUS 
She had a scroll in her hands, with both ends of it
rolled up, so that she seemed to be reading the one
part and to have already read the other. — As she
walked along, she was discussing something or other
with one of her escorts; I do not know what it was,
for she did not speak so that it could be overheard.
But when she smiled, Polystratus, she disclosed such
teeth! How can I tell you how white they were,
how symmetrical and well matched? If you have
ever seen a lovely string of very lustrous, equal
pearls, that is the way they stood in row; and they
were especially set off by the redness of her lips.
They shone, just as Homer says, like sawn ivory. 
Nor could you say that some of them were too broad,






 

others misshapen, and others prominent or wide
apart, as they are with most women. On the
contrary, all were of equal distinction, of the selfsame whiteness, of uniform size, and similarly close
together. In short, it was a great marvel; a
spectacle transcending all human beauty !

POLYSTRATUS 
Hold still! I perceive now quite clearly who the
woman is that you describe; I recognize her by just
these points and also by her country. Besides, you
said that there were eunuchs in her following.
 
 LYCINUS 
Yes, and several soldiers.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
It is the Emperor’s mistress, you simpleton —the
woman who is so famous!
 
 LYCINUS 
What is her name?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
Like herself, it is very pretty and charming.
She has the same name as the beautiful wife of
Abradatas. You know whom I mean, for you have
often heard Xenophon praise her as a good and
beautiful woman. 
 LYCINUS 
Yes, and it makes me feel as if I saw her when I
reach that place in my reading; I can almost hear



 

her say what she is described as saying, and see how
she armed her husband and what she was like when
she sent him off to the battle.

POLYSTRATUS 
But, my friend, you caught sight of her just once,
flying past like a flash, and naturally have praised
only what was obvious—I mean, her person and her
physical beauty. The good points of her soul you
have not beheld, and you do not know how great that
beauty is in her, far more notable and more divine than
that of her body. I do, for I am acquainted with
her, and have often conversed with her, being of the
same nationality. As you yourself know, I commend
gentleness, kindliness, high-mindedness, self-control,
and culture rather than beauty, for these qualities
deserve to be preferred over those of the body. To
do otherwise would be illogical and ridiculous, as if
one were to admire her clothing rather than her
person. Perfect beauty, to my mind, is when there
is a union of spiritual excellence and physical loveliness. In truth, I could point you out a great many
women who are well endowed with good looks, but
in every way discredit their beauty, so that if they
merely speak it fades and withers, since it suffers
by contrast and cuts a shabby figure, unworthily
housing as it does with a soul that is but a sorry
mistress. Such women seem to me like the temples
of Egypt, where the temple itself is fair and great,
built of costly stones and adorned with gold and
with paintings, but if you seek out the god within,
it is either a monkey or an ibis or a goat or a cat!
Women of that sort are to be seen in plenty. ,

 

Beauty, then, is not enough unless it is set off
with its just enhancements, by which I mean, not
purple raiment and necklaces, but those I have
already mentioned—virtue, self-control, goodness,
kindliness, and everything else that is included in
the definition of virtue.

LYCINUS 
Well then, Polystratus, trade me description for
description, giving, as the saying goes, measure for
measure, or even better than that, since you can.
Do a likeness of her soul and display it to me, so
‘that I need not admire her by halves.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
It is no light task, my friend, that you are setting
me; for it is not the same thing to laud what is
manifest to all, and to reveal in words what is invisible. I think that I too shall need fellow-workmen for the portrait, philosophers as well as sculptors
and painters, so that I can make my work of art
conform to their canons and can exhibit it as
modelled in the style of the ancients.

Come now, imagine it made. It will be “gifted
with speech,” first of all, and “clear-voiced” ; 
and Homer’s phrase “sweeter than honey from the
tongue” applies to her rather than to that old man
from Pylos. The whole tone of her voice is as soft
as can be; not deep, so as to resemble a man’s, nor
very high, so as to be quite womanish and wholly
strengthless, but like the voice of a boy still immature, delicious and winning, that gently steals into




 

the ear, so that even after she has ceased the sound
abides, some remnant of it lingering and filling the
ears with resonance, like an echo that prolongs
audition and leaves in the soul vague traces of her
words, honey-sweet and full of persuasion. And
when she lifts that glorious voice in song, above
all to the lyre, then—ah, then it is the hour for
halcyons and cicadas and swans to hush forthwith ;
for they are one and all unmelodious as against her,
and even Pandion’s daughter, should you mention her,
is an inexpert amateur, however “soundful” the
voice that she pours out.

And as for Orpheus
and Amphion, who exercised so very potent a spell
upon their auditors that even inanimate things
answered the call of their song, they themselves
in my opinion would have abandoned their lyres,
had they heard her, and would have stood by in
silence, listening. That scrupulous observance of
time, so that she makes no mistakes in the rhythm,
but her singing throughout keeps measure with
a beat that is accurate in its rise and fall, while
her lyre is in full accord, and her plectrum keeps
pace with her tongue; that delicacy of touch; that
flexibility of modulations—how could all this be
attained by your Thracian, or by that other who
studied lyre-playing on the slopes of Cithaeron in
the intervals of tending cattle ? 

 
Therefore, if ever you hear her sing, Lycinus, not
only will you have learned by experience, through
being turned into stone, what the Gorgons can do,




 

but you will know also what the effect of the Sirens
was like; for you will stand there enchanted, I know
right well, forgetful of country and of kin; and
if you stop your ears with wax, the song, in spite
of you, will slip through the very wax! Such
music is it, a lesson learned of some Terpsichore or
Melpomene, or of Calliope herself, fraught with a
thousand witcheries of every sort. I may sum it
up by saying: “Imagine that you are listening to
such singing as would naturally come from such
lips and from those teeth.” You yourself have seen
the lady in question, so consider that you have
heard her.

As to the precision of her language, and its pure
Ionic quality, as to the fact that she has a ready
tongue in conversation and is full of Attic wit—
that is nothing to wonder at. It is an inherited
trait in her, and ancestral, and nothing else was to
be expected, since she partakes of Athenian blood
through the settlement which they planted. Nor
indeed am I disposed to wonder at the further fact
that a countrywoman of Homer likes poetry and
holds much converse with it. 

 
There you have one picture, Lycinus, that of her
exquisite speech and her singing, as it might be portrayed in an inadequate sort of way. And now look
at the others—for I have decided not to exhibit a
single picture made up, like yours, out of many.
That is really less artistic, to combine beauties so
numerous and create, out of many, a thing of many
different aspects, completely at odds with itself.


 

No, all the several virtues of her soul shall be
portrayed each by itself in a single picture that is
a true copy of the model.
 
 LYCINUS 
It is a feast, Polystratus, a full banquet, that you
promise! In fact, it appears that you really will
give me back better measure. Anyhow, get on with
your measuring ; there is nothing else that you can
do which would please me more.

POLYSTRATUS 
Then inasmuch as culture must stand at the head
of all that is fair, and particularly all that is acquired
by study, let us now create its likeness, rich, however, in colours and in modelling, that even in this
point we may not fall short of your achievement in
sculpture. So let her be pictured as possessing all
the good gifts that come from Helicon. Unlike
Clio, Polymnia, Calliope, and the others, each of
whom has a single accomplishment, she shall have
those of all the Muses, and in addition those of
Hermes and Apollo. For all that poets have set
forth with the embellishment of metre or orators
with the might of eloquence, all that historians
have related or philosophers recommended shall give
beauty to our picture, not simply to the extent of
tinting its surface, but staining it all deeply with
indelible colours till it will take no more. And you
must pardon me if I can show no ancient model for
this picture ; for tradition tells us of nothing similar
in point of culture among the men of olden times.
But in spite of that, if you approve, it too may now

 

be hung; for no fault can be found with it, from
my point of view.
 
 LYCINUS 
It is very beautiful, to be sure, Polystratus, and
every line of it correctly drawn.

POLYSTRATUS 
Next we must delineate her wisdom and understanding. We shall require many models there,
most of them ancient, and one, like herself, Ionic,
painted and wrought by Aeschines, the friend of
Socrates, and by Socrates himself, of all craftsmen
the truest copyists because they painted with love.
It is that maid of Miletus, Aspasia, the consort
of the Olympian, himself a marvel beyond compare.
Putting before us, in her, no mean pattern of
understanding, let us take all that she had of
experience in affairs, shrewdness in_ statescraft,
quick-wittedness, and penetration, and transfer the
whole of it to our own picture by accurate measurement; making allowance, however, for the fact
that she was painted on a small canvas, but our
figure is colossal in its scale.
 
 LYCINUS 
What do you mean by that?
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
I mean, Lycinus, that the pictures are not of
equal size, though they look alike; for the Athenian
state of those days and the Roman empire of to-day
are not equal, nor near it. Consequently, although



 

ours resembles the other exactly, yet in size at least
it is superior, as being painted on a very broad canvas.

The second model and the third shall be
the famous Theano and the Lesbian poetess,
and Diotima shall be still another. Theano
shall contribute her high-mindedness, Sappho the
attractiveness of her way of living, and Diotima
shall be copied not only in those qualities for which
Socrates commended her, but in her general intelligence and power to give counsel. There you
have another picture, Lycinus, which may be hung
also.

LYCINUS 
Yes, Polystratus, for it is marvellous. But paint
more of them.
 
 POLYSTRATUS 
That of her goodness and loving-kindness, my
friend, which will disclose the gentleness of her
nature and its graciousness to all those who make
demands upon her? Then let her be compared
with that Theano who was wife of Antenor, 
and with Arete, and Arete’s daughter Nausicaa,
and with any other who in high station behaved
with propriety in the face of her good fortune.

Next in order, let her modesty be portrayed, and
her love for her consort, in such a way as to be
most like the daughter of Icarius, described by





 

Homer as modest and prudent (for that is the way
he drew the picture of Penelope); or like her
own homonym, the wife of Abradatas, whom we
mentioned a little while ago. 
 LYCINUS 
Once more you have created a very beautiful
picture, Polystratus; and now, perhaps, your portraits are finished, for you have traversed all of
her soul in praising it part by part.

POLYSTRATUS 
Not all of it! The very greatest items in her
praise are still unincluded. I mean that in so
elevated a station she has not clothed herself in
pride over her success, and has not been uplifted
above the limit that beseems humanity through
confidence in Fortune, but keeps herself upon the
common plane, with no tasteless or vulgar aspirations,
treats her visitors familiarly and as an equal, and
gives her friends greetings and evidences of affection
that are all the sweeter to them because, although
they come from one who is above them, they make
no display of circumstance. Truly, all those who
employ great power not in superciliousness but in
kindness, are regarded as especially worthy of the
blessings that have been bestowed upon them by
Fortune, and they alone deserve to escape envy.
Nobody will envy the man above him if he sees him
behaving with moderation amid his successes and
not, like Homer's Ate, treading on the heads of



 

men and crushing whatever is feebler. That is the
way: in which the low-minded are affected because
of their vulgarity of soul. When, without their
expecting anything of the sort, Fortune suddenly
sets them in a winged, aerial car, they do not bide
contentedly where they are, and do not look beneath
them, but force themselves ever upwards. Therefore, as in the case of Icarus, their wax quickly
melts, their wings moult, and they bring ridicule
upon themselves by falling head-first into deep waters
and breaking seas. But those who pattern after
Daedalus in the use of their wings and do not rise
too high, knowing that their pinions were made of
wax, but stint their flight as mere mortals should
and are content to be carried above, but only just
above, the waves, so that they keep their wings always
wet and avoid exposing them to sheer sunshine—
they wing their passage at once safely and discreetly.
This is what might be most praised in her. Consequently she gets from all the return that she
deserves ; for all pray that these wings may abide
with her and that blessings may accrue to her in
still greater fulness.

LYCINUS 
So be it, Polystratus. She deserves it, because it
is not in body alone, like Helen, that she is fair, but
the soul that she harbours therein is still more fair
and lovely. It was in keeping, too, that our
Emperor, kindly and gentle as he is, along with
all the other blessings that he enjoys, should be so

 

tavoured by Fortune as to have such a woman born
in his time and consort with him and love him. For
that is no trivial favour of Fortune—a woman about
whom one can quote with propriety the saying of
Homer, that she vies with golden Aphrodite in
beauty and equals Athena herself in accomplishments. Among mortal women there is none to
compare with her, “neither in stature nor mould”
(as Homer says), “nor in mind nor in aught that
she doeth.”

POLYSTRATUS 
You are right, Lycinus. So, if you are willing,
let us put our portraits together, the statue that
you modelled of her body and the pictures that I
painted of her soul; let us blend them all into one,
put it down in a book, and give it to all mankind to
admire, not only to those now alive, but to those
that shall live hereafter. It would at least prove
more enduring than the works of Apelles and
Parrhasius and Polygnotus, and far more pleasing
to the lady herself than anything of that kind,
inasmuch as it is not made of wood and wax and
colours but portrayed with inspirations from the
Muses; and this will be found the most accurate
kind of portrait, since it simultaneously discloses
beauty of body and nobility of soul.