DIOGENES My dear Pollux, I have some instructions for you
as soon as you go up top. It’s your turn for resurrection
to-morrow, I believe. If you see Menippus,
the Dog
 
 , anywhere (you’ll find him in Corinth at
the Craneum or in the Lyceum at Athens, laughing
at the Philosophers wrangling with each other), tell
him this from me. “Diogenes bids you, Menippus,
if you’ve laughed enough at the things on the earth
above, come down here, if you want much more to
laugh at; for on earth your laughter was fraught
with uncertainty, and people often wondered
whether anyone at all was quite sure about what
follows death, but here you’ll be able to laugh
endlessly without any doubts, as I do now—and
particularly when you see rich men, satraps and
tyrants so humble and insignificant, with nothing to
distinguish them but their groans, and see them to
be weak and contemptible when they recall their life
above.” That’s the message you’ve to give him and
one further thing—that he’s to come here with his
wallet filled with lots of lupines and any meals
dedicated to Hecate he finds at cross-roads, or eggs
from sacrifices of purification, or anything of the sort.

POLLUX I’ll deliver your message, Diogenes. But if I could
have precise information about his appearance— 

 DIOGENES He’s old and bald, with a decrepit cloak full of
windows and open to every wind, a motley of flapping
rags; he’s always laughing and Generally
mocking those hypocritical Philosophers. 

 POLLUX If we judge from these details at any rate, he
should be easy to find. 

 DIOGENES May I send a piece of advice to these Philosophers
also? 

 POLLUX Yes; no difficulty with that either. 

 DIOGENES Pass on a brief message to them to stop their
foolish talk and their bickering about the universe,
and making each other grow horns,
 
 and composing
puzzles about crocodiles,
 
 and teaching the human
mind to ask such insoluble riddles. 

 POLLUX But they say I’m an uneducated ignoramus to cast
aspersions on their wisdom. 

 

 DIOGENES You tell them from me to go to the devil. 

 POLLUX I’ll give this message too, Diogenes.

DIOGENES And take this message to the rich men from us, my dearest Pollux. “Why do you guard your gold, you senseless fools? Why do you punish yourselves, counting interest, and piling talents on talents, when you must come here shortly with no more than a penny?”
 
 

 POLLUX They shall have this message too. 

 DIOGENES Yes, and say to the men who are handsome and strong like Megillus of Corinth and Damoxenus the wrestler, “Here with us are no golden locks or blue eyes or dark eyes, or rosy cheek, no well-strung sinews or sturdy shoulders—all with us, to quote the proverb, is one and the same dust, skulls bereft of good looks.” 

 POLLUX Another easy message for me to give—to the handsome and strong.

DIOGENES And tell the poor, my Spartan friend, who are many, displeased with life and pitying themselves
 


for their poverty, not to cry and moan; describe to
them our equality here, telling them how they’ll see
the rich on earth no better here than they are themselves.
And tell your own Spartans off from me, if
you will, for having become so slack. 

 POLLUX Not a word to me about Spartans, Diogenes; I
won’t tolerate that. But I’ll deliver your messages
to all the others. 

 DIOGENES Let’s forget about the Spartans, since that’s your
wish, but be sure to give my messages to the people
I mentioned earlier on.

CHARON Pay the fare, curse you. 

 MENIPPUS Shout away, Charon, if that’s what you prefer. 

 CHARON Pay me, I say, for taking you across. 

 MENIPPUS You can’t get blood out of a stone. 

 CHARON Is there anyone who hasn’t a single penny? 

 

 MENIPPUS I don’t know about anyone else, but I am without one. 

 CHARON But by Pluto, I’ll throttle you, you blackguard, if
you don’t pay. 

 MENIPPUS And I’ll smash your head with a blow from my
stick. 

 CHARON Then you’ll have sailed all this long way for
nothing. 

 MENIPPUS Hermes delivered me to you; let him pay.

HERMES Heaven help me, if I’m going to pay for the dead
too. 

 CHARON I won’t leave you alone. 

 MENIPPUS Then you’d better beach your ferry, and stay put;
but how will you get what I don’t have? 

 CHARON Didn’t you know you had to bring it with you? 


 
 MENIPPUS Yes, but I didn’t have it. What of it? Did that
make it wrong for me to die? 

 CHARON So you’ll be the only one to boast of a free passage? 

 MENIPPUS Not free, my good fellow; I baled, I helped at the
oar, I was the only passenger who wasn’t weeping. 

 CHARON That’s nothing to do with a ferryman; your penny
must be paid. No alternative’s allowed.

MENIPPUS Then take me back to life. 

 CHARON That’s a bright remark! Do you want me also to
get a thrashing from Aeacus for my pains? 

 MENIPPUS Then don’t bother me. 

 CHARON Show me what you have in your bag. 

 MENIPPUS Lupines, if you want some, and a meal meant for
Hecate. 

 CHARON Where did you find us this Dog, Hermes? How
he chattered on the crossing too, mocking and jeering


 


at all the passengers and singing on his own while
they were lamenting! 

 HERMES Don’t you know, my dear Charon, what sort of
man you’ve taken across? He is absolutely independent
and cares for nobody. This is Menippus. 

 CHARON But if ever I get my hands on you— 

 MENIPPUS If you get your hands on me, my good fellow!
But you won’t get them on me a second time.

CROESUS Pluto, we can’t stand having this Dog, Menippus,
for our neighbour. So put him somewhere else, or
we’ll move ourselves. 

 PLUTO What harm does he do you as a fellow-shade? 

 CROESUS Whenever we moan and groan at our memories of
life above, Midas recalling his gold, Sardanapalus
 
 his
great luxury, and I, Croesus, my treasures, he mocks
and reviles us, calling us slaves and scum: sometimes
he even disturbs our lamentations by singing.
In short, he’s a pest. 


 
 PLUTO What’s this they tell me, Menippus? 

 MENIPPUS True enough, Pluto; I hate them; they’re low
scoundrels, not content with having led bad lives,
but even in death they remember their past and
cling to it. That’s why I enjoy tormenting them. 

 PLUTO You shouldn’t; they mourn great losses. 

 MENIPPUS Are you a fool too, Pluto? Do you approve of
their groanings? 

 PLUTO Not at all, but I wouldn’t like you to be quarrelling.

MENIPPUS Even so, you lowest of the low from Lydia,
Phrygia and Assyria, I’d have you know that
I’ll never stop. Wherever you go, I’ll follow, tormenting
you with my songs and mockery. 

 CROESUS Isn’t this outrageous? 

 MENIPPUS No, the outrageous thing was your behaviour,
when you expected people to worship you, treated
free men with contempt, and forgot all about death.






 


That’s why you’re going to lament the loss of all
those things. 

 CROESUS Oh, ye gods, many and great possessions they were! 

 MIDAS All my gold! 

 SARDANAPALUS All my luxury! 

 MENIPPUS Bravo, go on. You keep up your whimperings,
and I’ll accompany you with song, with a string of
“Know-Thyself” s for my refrain. That’s the proper
accompaniment for such lamentations.

MENIPPUS My dear Cerberus—I’m a relation, being a Dog
myself—I beg you, in the name of the Styx, to tell
me what Socrates was like when he came down to
you. Seeing that you’re a god, you can be expected
not merely to bark, but also to talk like a
human when you wish. 

 CERBERUS When he was at a distance, Menippus, his face
seemed completely impassive as he approached, and
he appeared to have not the slightest fear of death,
and he wanted to impress this on those who stood





 


outside the entrance, but when he had peeped into
the chasm, and seen the darkness, and I had bitten
him and dragged him by the foot, because he was
still slowed down by the hemlock, he shrieked like
an infant, and cried for his children and went frantic.

MENIPPUS Then the fellow was just a sham, and didn’t really
despise his plight? 

 CERBERUS No, but since he could see it was inescapable, he
put on a bold front, pretending he would be glad to
accept what was quite inevitable, all to win the
admiration of the onlookers. I could Generalise
about all such men: as far as the entrance, they are
bold and brave, but what comes inside is the real test. 

 MENIPPUS What did you think of me, when I came down? 

 CERBERUS You alone were a credit to your breed—you and
Diogenes before you, because you came in without
having to be forced or pushed, but of your own
accord, laughing and cursing at everyone.

MENIPPUS Tell me, Hermes, where are the beauties of both
sexes? Show me round, as I’m a newcomer. 


 
 HERMES I have no time, Menippus. But just look over
there to your right, where you’ll see Hyacinthus,
Narcissus, NIreus, Achilles, Tyro, Helen, and Leda,
and, in fact, all the beauties of old. 

 MENIPPUS I can only see bones and bare skulls, most of them
looking the same. 

 HERMES Yet those are what all the poets admire, those
bones which you seem to despise. 

 MENIPPUS But show me Helen. I can’t pick her out myself. 

 HERMES This skull is Helen. 

 MENIPPUS Was it then for this that the thousand ships were
manned from all Greece, for this that so many
Greeks and barbarians fell, and so many cities were
devastated?

HERMES Ah, but you never saw the woman alive, Menippus,
or you would have said yourself that it was forgivable
that they “for such a lady long should suffer
woe”.
 
 For if one sees flowers that are dried up
and faded, they will, of course, appear ugly; but
when they are in bloom and have their colour, they
are very beautiful. 


 
 MENIPPUS Well, Hermes, what does surprise me is this: that
the Achaeans didn’t know how short-lived a thing
they strove for, and how soon it loses its bloom. 

 HERMES I have no time to moralise with you, Menippus.
Choose a place to lie down in, wherever you like,
and I’ll be off now to fetch the other shades.

MENIPPUS I ask you, Aeacus, in the name of Pluto, to conduct
me round every thing in Hades. 

 AEACUS It’s not easy to do it all, Menippus, but I’ll show
you the chief things. This is Cerberus, as you know,
and on your way in you’ve already seen the ferryman
here who brought you over, and the lake and
Pyriphlegethon. 

 MENIPPUS I know all that and that you are the gate-keeper,
and I’ve seen the king and the Furies. But show
me the men of old, and particularly the famous ones. 


 
 AEACUS This is Agamemnon, and this Achilles, here is
Idomeneus close by, and here Odysseus, then come
Ajax, Diomede and the finest of the Greeks.

MENIPPUS Dear me, Homer, how the central figures of your
epics have been cast to the ground and lie unrecognisable
and ugly, all so much dust and rubbish,
“strengthless heads”
 
 in very truth! But who is
this, Aeacus? 

 AEACUS Cyrus, and this is Croesus, and the one beyond
him Sardanapalus, and beyond them Midas, and
that one is Xerxes. 

 MENIPPUS Then you, you scum, were the terror of Hellas?
You bridged the Hellespont, and wanted to sail
through the mountains?
 
 And what a sight
Croesus is! And, Aeacus, let me slap the face of
Sardanapalus. 

 AEACUS Don’t, you’re breaking his skull; it’s as weak as
a woman’s. 

 MENIPPUS Then at least I’ll have a good spit at him, since
he’s as much woman as man.

AEACUS Would you like me to show you the Philosophers? 

 MENIPPUS Oh yes, please. 

 AEACUS Here first you have Pythagoras. 

 MENIPPUS Good day to you, Euphorbus or Apollo, or whatever
name you prefer.
 
 

 PYTHAGORAS And a bad day to you, Menippus. 

 MENIPPUS Don’t you still have your thigh of gold?
 
 

 PYTHAGORAS No; but let me see if there’s anything to eat in
your wallet. 

 MENIPPUS Beans, my good fellow—something you mustn’t eat. 

 PYTHAGORAS Just give me some. Doctrines are different
among the dead; I’ve learnt that beans and
parents’ heads
 
 are not the same thing here.

AEACUS This is Solon, the son of Execestides, and that is
Thales, and past them is Pittacus, and the others;
they are seven in all, as you see. 


 
 MENIPPUS These are the only happy and cheerful ones,
Aeacus. But who is this covered with cinders, like
a loaf baked in the ashes, and with such a crop of
blisters on his skin? 

 AEACUS Empedocles; he came half-boiled from Etna. 

 MENIPPUS O brazen-foot
 
 most excellent, what came over
you that you jumped into the crater? 

 EMPEDOCLES A fit of mad depression, Menippus. 

 MENIPPUS No, but a fit of vanity and pride and a dose of
drivelling folly; that was what burnt you to ashes,
boots and all—and well you deserved it! But the
trick didn’t do you any good; they found out that
you were dead. But wherever, Aeacus, is Socrates? 

 AEACUS Usually he’s talking nonsense with Nestor and
Palamedes. 

 MENIPPUS However, I should like to see him, if he’s around. 


 
 AEACUS Do you see the bald one? 

 MENIPPUS They’re all bald; that distinguishing feature
would apply to them all. 

 AEACUS I mean the one with the snub nose. 

 MENIPPUS This too they have in common; they’re all snub-nosed.

SOCRATES Looking for me, Menippus? 

 MENIPPUS Yes, I am, Socrates. 

 SOCRATES What’s the news in Athens? 

 MENIPPUS Many of the young men call themselves Philosophers,
and, to judge at least from their garb and
gait, are tiptop Philosophers. 

 SOCRATES I’ve seen lots of them. 

 MENIPPUS But you’ve seen, I imagine, what Aristippus was
like when he came to join you, or Plato himself—the
one reeking of scent, the other accomplished in
flattering Sicilian tyrants. 


 
 SOCRATES And what do they think of me? 

 MENIPPUS In these respects at least, you’re a lucky fellow,
Socrates. At any rate they all think you were a
wonderful man, and knew everything, though—I
think I’m right in saying so—you knew nothing. 

 SOCRATES That’s what I myself kept telling them, but they
thought it was all pretence on my part.

MENIPPUS But who are these round you? 

 SOCRATES Charmides, my good fellow, and Phaedrus and
Clinias’ son.
 
 

 MENIPPUS Bravo, Socrates! Still following your own special
line here! Still with an eye for beauty! 

 SOCRATES What could I find to do more agreeable? But
won’t you lie down by us, please? 

 MENIPPUS Oh, no; I’m going off to Croesus and Sardanapalus,
to stay near them. I expect to have plenty
of fun hearing their lamentations. 


 
 AEACUS I’m off now, too, to see that none of the dead gives
us the slip and escapes. You’ll see things in full
another time, Menippus. 

 MENIPPUS Off with you, Aeacus. What I’ve seen is enough.

MENIPPUS Why are you crying, Tantalus? Why do you
stand beside
 
 the lake lamenting your lot? 

 TANTALUS Because, Menippus, I’m dying of thirst. 

 MENIPPUS Are you too lazy to bend your head down and drink,
or even, bless us, to scoop the water up with your
palm? 

 TANTALUS It’s no good bending down; the water runs away
as soon as it feels me coming near, and, if ever I do
scoop up any, and bring it to my mouth, I can’t
wet the tip of my lips before it runs through my
fingers somehow and leaves my hand dry as before. 

 MENIPPUS You’re the victim of a miracle, Tantalus. But
tell me, just why do you need to drink? You have




 


no body, for that’s been buried in Lydia. That
could feel hunger and thirst. But you are a ghost;
how can you still be thirsty or able to drink? 

 TANTALUS It’s just that that’s my punishment—that my
ghost should be thirsty as if it were a body.

MENIPPUS Well, we’ll believe it, since you tell us you’re
punished by thirst. But what do you find so
terrible in that? Are you afraid of dying for lack
of drink? I can’t see another Hades after this one,
or a death hereafter taking us elsewhere. 

 TANTALUS You are quite right; but this is part of my
sentence—to long to drink when I’ve no need. 

 MENIPPUS Nonsense, Tantalus: I think you really do need
a drink—neat hellebore,
 
 so help me; you’re the
opposite of people bitten by mad dogs; you don’t
fear water, but you do fear thirst. 

 TANTALUS I don’t mind drinking even hellebore—I only wish
I could have some. 

 MENIPPUS Don’t worry, Tantalus, for neither you nor any
other dead man will drink; that’s impossible.




 


However, they’ve not all been condemned to thirst,
as you do, for water which won’t wait for them.

MENIPPUS I heard, Chiron, that though you were a god, you
wanted to die. 

 CHIRON What you heard is true, Menippus, and I am dead,
as you see, though I could have been immortal. 

 MENIPPUS Whatever made you so enamoured of death, a
thing for which most men have no love? 

 CHIRON I’ll tell you, seeing that you’re an intelligent
fellow. I had no pleasure left in enjoying immortality. 

 MENIPPUS Was it not pleasant to live and see the light? 

 CHIRON No, Menippus. I consider pleasure to come from
variety and change; but I was living on and on,
and enjoying the same things—sun, light and food;
the seasons were always the same, and everything
came in its turn, one thing seeming to follow


 


automatically upon another; and so I had too much
of it all, for I found my pleasure not in always having
the same thing, but also in doing quite without it. 

 MENIPPUS Well spoken, Chiron. But how do you endure
things in Hades, now that you’ve come down here
out of preference?

CHIRON I find them not unpleasant, Menippus. The
equality here is truly democratic, and it makes no
difference whether one is in light or in darkness.
Besides, there’s no need to be thirsty or hungry, as
up above; we don’t feel any of these needs. 

 MENIPPUS Take care you don’t trip yourself up, Chiron, and
have to use the same theory again. 

 CHIRON What do you mean? 

 MENIPPUS That if you became sick and tired of the constant
monotony and sameness of things in life, things here
too are monotonous; and so you may become just
as sick and tired of them, and have to look for a
change from here to yet another life—and that,
I think, is impossible. 

 CHIRON Then what can one do, Menippus? 


 
 MENIPPUS What I imagine a sensible man is reputed to do—be
content and satisfied with one’s lot and think
no part of it intolerable.

MENIPPUS It’s difficult to tell now, Tiresias, whether you’re
blind, as our eyes are all alike—empty, with nothing
but sockets. Indeed, you can no longer tell which
was Phineus, or which was Lynceus.
 
 But I do know
you were a prophet, and the only person to have
been both man and woman. I heard that from the
poets. So, for heaven’s sake, tell me which life you
found more pleasant—when you were a man, or a
woman? 

 TIRESIAS The woman’s life, Menippus, by a long way. It
has fewer worries, and women have the mastery over
men, and don’t have to fight in wars, or stand on
the battlements, or argue in parliament, or be crossexamined
in court.

MENIPPUS Then you haven’t heard, Tiresias, what Euripides’
Medea
 
 said about women’s pitiable plight in having





 


an unhappy lot, and having to endure intolerable
suffering in childbirth? But tell me, now that I’m
reminded of it by Medea’s lines from the play, did
you ever have any children, when you were a woman,
or did you remain barren and childless in that life? 

 TIRESIAS Why do you ask that, Menippus? 

 MENIPPUS It’s an easy enough question, Tiresias. Just
answer, if it’s not too difficult. 

 TIRESIAS I wasn’t barren, but I didn’t have any children. 

 MENIPPUS That will suffice; I wanted to know if you had a
womb. 

 TIRESIAS Of course I did. 

 MENIPPUS And in time your womb gradually disappeared,
the woman’s place sealed up, your breasts subsided,
you grew a male organ and produced a beard? Or
was your change from woman to man sudden? 

 TIRESIAS I don’t understand the object of your question,
but it seems to me you don’t believe things happened
like that. 


 
 MENIPPUS Why shouldn’t I disbelieve such a story, Tiresias,
rather than accept it like a dolt without examining
whether its possible or not?

TIRESIAS Then you don’t believe any of the other stories
either, when you hear of women changing into birds
or trees or beasts, as, for example, Aedon, or Daphne,
or the daughter of Lycaon?
 
 

 MENIPPUS If I ever come across them, I’ll learn what they
have to say. But when you were a woman, good
sir, were you a prophet then too, just as later, or did
you learn to be man and prophet at the same time? 

 TIRESIAS You see, you know nothing about me, or how I
settled a quarrel of the gods,
 
 and Hera blinded me,
and Zeus consoled me in my misfortune with the
gift of prophecy. 

 MENIPPUS So you still keep to your falsehoods, Tiresias?
That’s just like you prophets; you’re habitual liars.

MENIPPUS And yet the pair of you, Trophonius and Amphilochus,
though shades, have somehow or other been
thought worthy of temples, and are considered
prophets, and empty-headed men have taken you
for gods! 

 AMPHILOCHUS Well, how is that our fault, if they are so silly as
to think such things about Dead Men? 

 MENIPPUS They would never have done so but for all your
mysterious talk in your lifetime, and your pretence
of knowing the future and foretelling it to anyone
who asked. 

 TROPHONIUS My good Menippus, Amphilochus here will know
what answer to give on his own behalf, but, as for me,
I am a hero and prophesy if anyone comes down to
me. But I don’t think you’ve visited Lebadea at
all, or you wouldn’t be so sceptical.

MENIPPUS What’s that? Must I go to Lebadea, and make
a fool of myself wearing linen and carrying a pancake
in my hands, and crawl into your cave through that
passage that’s so low, in order to be able to tell
that you’re dead just like us, surpassing us only in
your false pretences? But, in the name of prophecy,
what is a hero? I don’t know. 


 
 TROPHONIUS A compound of god and man. 

 MENIPPUS Something neither man nor god, you mean, but
both at once? Well then, where has your divine
half gone at present? 

 TROPHONIUS It’s prophesying, Menippus, in Boeotia. 

 MENIPPUS I don’t know what you mean, Trophonius; but
I can see quite clearly that all of you is dead.

DIOGENES Isn’t that Heracles? No one else, by Heracles!
Bow, club, lionskin, bulk—Heracles from head to toe.
Is he dead, then, though a son of Zeus? Tell me,
conquering hero, are you a shade? I used to
sacrifice to you on earth above, thinking you a god. 

 HERACLES And quite right too. The real Heracles is in
heaven with the gods, and “hath beauteous-ankled
Hebe for his wife”;
 
 I am his wraith. 

 DIOGENES What do you mean? The god’s wraith? Is it
possible for anyone to be half god, and half dead? 


 
 HERACLES Yes, for Heracles is not dead, but only I his
likeness.

DIOGENES I understand. He has given you to Pluto in his
own place as a substitute, and you are now dead
instead of him. 

 HERACLES Something like that. 

 DIOGENES But Aeacus is very exact. How did he fail
to spot that you were a fraud? How did he accept
a changeling Heracles whom he saw face to face? 

 HERACLES Because I was exactly like him. 

 DIOGENES Very true; an exact likeness indeed; you might
be the fellow himself. But perhaps it’s the other
way round, and you are Heracles, and the wraith has
married Hebe in heaven.

HERACLES What impudence! You talk too much. If you
don’t stop these gibes at me, I’ll soon show you what
sort of god has me for a wraith. 

 DIOGENES The bow is out and ready. But why should I fear
you now? I’ve died once and for all. But please tell


 


me, in the name of your Heracles; when he was
alive, were you with him then too, as his wraith?
Or were you both one during his lifetime, but split
up when you died, Heracles flying off to heaven,
while you, his wraith, came here to Hades, as was
only right? 

 HERACLES One who makes it his business to poke fun doesn’t
so much as deserve a reply. However, I’ll let you
have one more answer. All of Amphitryon that was
in Heracles is dead, and I am all that part; but the
part that came from Zeus is in heaven living with the
gods.

DIOGENES Now I understand perfectly. Alcmena, you mean,
bore two Heracleses at the same time, one by
Amphitryon, the other from Zeus, and so you were
twin sons of the same mother—though nobody knew
about it? 

 HERACLES No, you fool. We were both the same person. 

 DIOGENES That’s difficult to understand, two Heracleses in
a compound, unless you were man and god fused
together, like horse and man in a Centaur. 

 HERACLES Well, don’t you think everyone is compounded of
two parts, soul and body? What then prevents the


 


soul, the part which came from Zeus, from being in
heaven, and me, the mortal part, from being with the
dead?

DIOGENES But, most excellent son of Amphitryon, you
would be right enough, if you were a body, but in
fact you are a bodiless wraith. So it looks as if
you’re now making Heracles triple. 

 HERACLES How triple? 

 DIOGENES Like this. If there’s one of him in heaven, and
one here with us (that’s you the wraith), and there’s
his body on Oeta, now dust, he’s now become three.
You’d better start thinking what third father you’ll
invent for your body. 

 HERACLES You’re an impudent quibbler. Who the blazes
 are you? 

 DIOGENES I’m the wraith of Diogenes of Sinope, but Diogenes
himself isn’t “among the gods that know not
death”,
 
 no indeed, but in the company of the finest
of the ghosts, laughing at Homer and nonsensical
stories like this.

PHILIP You can’t deny being my son now, Alexander;
you wouldn’t be dead, if you were the son of Ammon. 

 ALEXANDER I knew quite well myself, father, that I was the
son of Philip, the son of Amyntas, but I accepted the
oracle, because I thought it useful for my purposes. 

 PHILIP What! Useful to allow yourself to be cheated by
the prophets? 

 ALEXANDER Not that, but the barbarians were terrified of me,
and nobody resisted me any more; they thought
they were fighting against a god, so that I conquered
them the more easily.

PHILIP What enemies did you conquer that were worth
fighting? Your adversaries were always cowards,
and armed with nothing better than bows and
bucklers and wicker shields. But conquering
Greeks, conquering Boeotians, Phocians and Athenians
was a real task, and subduing Arcadian heavy
troops, Thessalian horse, javelin men of Elis, and
light troops from Mantinea, or Thracians, Illyrians


 


or Paeonians was a great achievement. But as for
Medes, Persians and Chaldaeans, effeminate creatures
bedecked in gold—you weren’t the first to conquer
them. Don’t you know how Clearchus did so,
going inland with a mere ten thousand men, and
they didn’t even wait to fight at close quarters, but
fled before they were in bow-shot?

ALEXANDER But, father, the Scythians and the elephants of
the Indians are not to be despised, and yet I won
my victories over them without sowing dissension,
or using bribery and treachery. I never went back
on an oath or a promise, or broke faith to gain a
victory, and, though I took over most of the Greeks
without bloodshed, perhaps you’ve heard how I
punished the Thebans. 

 PHILIP I know all that; I was told by Clitus, whom you
killed at dinner, by running him through with a
spear, because he dared to praise me rather than
your achievements.

Furthermore, you discarded
the Macedonian cloak, they tell me, for a Median
doublet, and took to a tiara worn upright on your
head, and expected Macedonians, free men, to bow
down before you. And, most ridiculous thing of all,
you aped the habits of your defeated foes! I won’t
mention your other activities—how you locked up
educated
 

men along with lions, all your weddings,
and your inordinate affection for Hephaestion. I’ve




 


only heard of one thing I can praise; you kept your
attentions away from Darius’ beautiful queen,
 
 and
looked after his mother
 
 and his daughters.
 
 That
was conduct befitting a king.

ALEXANDER Don’t you praise me for my adventurous spirit,
father, and for being first man to leap into the fort of
the Oxydracae, and for receiving so many wounds? 

 PHILIP I don’t. Not that I think it’s a bad thing for a
king to suffer an occasional wound and to face
dangers at the head of his army; but that wasn’t
at all the sort of thing for you. For you were
supposed to be a god, and any time you were
wounded and seen being carried out of the fighting
on a litter, streaming with blood and groaning from
your wound, the onlookers were amused to see how
Ammon was being shown up as an impostor whose
forecasts were false, and his prophets as mere
flatterers. Who wouldn’t have been amused to see
the son of Zeus fainting and calling for the assistance
of the doctors? For now that you’re dead, don’t
you think that there are many who wax witty about
that pretence of yours, now that they see the corpse
of the “god ‘” lying at full length, clammy and
swollen like any other body? Besides, this policy,
which you said was so useful, Alexander, the policy
of gaining easy victories in this way, greatly
diminished the glory of your successes. For everything
seemed disappointing, when regarded as the
work of a god.

ALEXANDER People don’t think like that about me, but put
me on a par with Heracles and Dionysus. And yet
I alone have subdued the famous Aornos, a place
captured by neither of them. 

 PHILIP Don’t you see how you’re speaking just now like
the son of Ammon, in comparing yourself to
Heracles and Dionysus? Aren’t you ashamed,
Alexander? Won’t you learn to forget your pride,
and know yourself, and realise that you’re now dead?

DIOGENES What’s this, Alexander? Are you dead too, just
like the rest of us? 

 ALEXANDER As you see, Diogenes. There’s nothing strange in
a human like me dying. 

 DIOGENES Ammon lied, then, when he said you were his
son? You were Philip’s son after all? 

 ALEXANDER Of course I was Philip’s son. I shouldn’t have
died, if Ammon was my father. 

 

 DIOGENES And it was another lie about Olympias—that a
serpent came to her and was seen in her bed, that
that was how you came to be born, and that Philip
was deceived in thinking that he was your father? 

 ALEXANDER I heard that too, just as you did, but now I see
that there was not a word of truth in what my
mother and the prophets of Ammon said. 

 DIOGENES But their lies weren’t without practical advantage
to you, Alexander. For many cowered down before
you, thinking you a god.

But tell me, to whom have
you left your great empire? 

 ALEXANDER I don’t know, Diogenes; I didn’t give any instructions
about it in time; I merely gave my ring
to Perdiccas when I died. But why do you laugh, Diogenes? 

 DIOGENES I’m only recalling how Greece treated you,
flattering you from the moment you succeeded to
your kingdom, and choosing you as her champion
and leader against the barbarians, and how some
even added you to the twelve gods, built you temples,
and sacrificed to you, as the son of the serpent.

But tell me, where did the Macedonians bury you? 


 
 ALEXANDER I’ve been lying in Babylon for a whole thirty days
now, but my guardsman Ptolemy promises that,
whenever he gets a respite from the present disturbances,
he’ll take me away to Egypt and bury me
there, so that I may become one of the gods of the Egyptians. 

 DIOGENES Well, can I help laughing, Alexander, when I see
that even in Hades you still act like a fool and hope
you’ll be an Anubis or an Osiris? But don’t be
too hopeful about that, personage most divine. It’s
against our law that anyone who has once sailed
across our lake and passed within our entrance
should go up again. For Aeacus does not neglect
his duties, nor is Cerberus to be taken lightly.

But
what I should like you to tell me is how you bear the
thought of the great happiness you left on the earth
above, when you came here—your bodyguards, crack
regiments and satraps, all that gold, the nations
bowing down before you, and Babylon and Bactra,
and those enormous beasts, and the honour and the
glory, and your distinction, when you rode forth
with a white ribbon on your head, and wearing a
purple robe fastened with brooches. Don’t you feel
sad that these things are passing beyond your
memory? Why do you cry, you fool? Didn’t the
wise Aristotle even teach you to realise the insecurity
of the gifts of fortune?

ALEXANDER Wise Aristotle! Why, he’s the arch-knave of all
flatterers. Let me be the sole authority on him,





 


with all his requests for gifts and his instructions,
and the way he took advantage of my zeal for
education by flattering and praising me, sometimes
for my beauty (as though even that were part of the
“Good”), or again for my achievements and my
wealth. For that was yet another thing he counted
as good, so that he need have no shame in accepting
some for himself too. The fellow’s an impostor,
Diogenes, and a master at the game. But I did at
least get one thing from his wisdom—grief for those
things you’ve just enumerated, for I think them the
greatest of goods.

DIOGENES Well, here’s what to do. I’ll prescribe a cure for
your grief. As there’s no hellebore
 
 growing here,
you’d better take a stiff drink of the water of Lethe,
and repeat the dose frequently, and then you’ll stop
sorrowing for Aristotle’s “goods”. Do so, for I see
Clitus over there and Callisthenes
 
 and many others
bearing down on you, to tear you to pieces and get
even with you for the things you did to them. So
you’d better take this other path here, and take
frequent doses as I’ve just said.

HERMES If you don’t mind, ferryman, let’s work out how
much you owe me at the moment, so that we won’t
quarrel about it later. 


 
 CHARON Let’s do that, Hermes. It’s better to have this
settled, and it’ll save trouble. 

 HERMES I brought you an anchor as you ordered; five
drachmae. 

 CHARON That’s dear. 

 HERMES By Hades, that’s what I paid for it, and a thong
for an oar cost me two obols. 

 CHARON Put down five drachmae and two obols. 

 HERMES And a darning-needle for your sail. Five obols
it cost me. 

 CHARON Put that down too. 

 HERMES And wax to plug up the leaks in your boat, and
nails, and a bit of rope which you made into a brace,
costing two drachmae in all. 

 CHARON You got these cheap too! 


 
 HERMES That’s all, unless we’ve forgotten something in
our calculations. Well, when do you say that you
are going to pay me? 

 CHARON For the moment, Hermes, it’s impossible, but if
an epidemic or a war sends me down a large batch,
I can then make a profit, by overcharging on the
fares in the rush.

HERMES So, for the present, I’ll have to sit down and pray
for the worst to happen so that I may be paid? 

 CHARON It can’t be helped, Hermes. We get few coming
here at the moment, as you can see. It’s peacetime. 

 HERMES Better so, even if you do keep me waiting for what
you owe me. Ah, but in the old days, Charon, you
know what men they were that came, all of them
brave, and most of them covered with blood and
wounded; but now we get a few poisoned by a wife
or a son, or with their legs and bellies all puffed out
with rich living, a pale miserable lot, all of them,
quite unlike the old ones. Most of them have
money to thank for their coming here; they scheme
against each other for it, apparently. 

 CHARON Yes, it’s the grand passion. 


 
 HERMES Then you won’t think it wrong of me if I dun you
for my debt.

PLUTO Do you know the old man—I mean that veritable
greybeard, EuCrates the rich—the man with no sons,
but with fifty thousand men hunting his estate? 

 HERMES Yes, you mean the man from Sicyon. Well,
what? 

 PLUTO Let him go on living, Hermes, and, over and above
the ninety years he’s had already, measure out as
many more for him, if possible, or even more; but
as for his toadies, young Charinus and Damon and
the rest, drag them all down here one after the
other. 

 HERMES That would look queer. 

 PLUTO No; it would be perfectly just. What possesses
them that they pray for his death, or aspire to his
fortune, although not related? But what’s most
disgusting of all is the way they shower attentions
on him in public in spite of such prayers, and make
their plans obvious to everyone when he’s sick, but,


 


in spite of it all, they promise sacrifices if he recovers;
in fact there’s no little versatility in their flattery. So,
I’d like him to be immortal, and them, thwarted in
their open-mouthed greed, to depart the scene before
him.

HERMES That will be an amusing fate for the rascals to
suffer. 

 PLUTO He himself often leads them up the garden path
with great skill, and has hopes of his own. In fact,
though he always looks “close to death’s dark
vale”,
 
 he’s a lot healthier than the young men.
But they’ve already divided up his property amongst
themselves and batten on it, thinking a life of bliss
is already theirs. So, let him cast off his old age
like Iolaus,
 
 and grow young again, and let them
leave behind the wealth they dreamed of, and in the
midst of their hopes come here forthwith, dying the
sorry death they deserve. 

 HERMES Don’t worry, Pluto. I’ll start fetching them for
you now, one after the other. There are seven of
them, I think. 

 PLUTO Drag them down, and he’ll change from old age
to the prime of youth, and attend each of the
funerals.

TERPSION Is this just, Pluto? Me to die at thirty, and old
Thucritus, already over ninety, to go on living? 

 PLUTO Perfectly just, Terpsion; he lives on without
praying for the death of any of his friends, but you
spent all your time plotting against him and waiting
for his possessions. 

 TERPSION Well, oughtn’t an old man like him, who can no
longer make use of his wealth, to depart from life
and make way for young men? 

 PLUTO I never heard the like of this edict of yours,
Terpsion, requiring the death of anyone who can no
longer use his wealth on pleasure. But Fate and
Nature have arranged things otherwise.

TERPSION Then I object to the present arrangement. It
ought to be a matter of turn, with the oldest man
first, and after him the next oldest, without the
slightest change in the order. Your Methuselah
shouldn’t live on, when he has no more than three
teeth still left, and is scarcely able to see, supported
by four servants, with his nose always running and
his eyes bleary, past knowing any of the pleasures


 


of life, a living tomb laughed at by the young men.
He shouldn’t live, while handsome lusty young men
die. That’s as unnatural as “rivers running backwards
”.
 
 The young men ought at least to know
when each old man is going to die, so that they
wouldn’t waste their attentions upon some of them.
But at present, it’s just one more case of the proverbial
cart coming before the horse.

PLUTO Things are done much more sensibly than you
think, Terpsion. Tell me now, what makes you
gape with greed at other people’s property, and foist
yourselves upon childless old men? As a result
you provide a good laugh, if your burial comes
before theirs, and most folk find the situation really
delightful. The more you pray for their death, the
more delighted people are, if you die first; for there’s
never been anything like this art you’ve invented,
with your love for old men and women, and for the
childless ones in particular, while those with children
inspire no love in your hearts. However, many
of those you love have seen through the wickedness
behind your affection, and, even if they have children,
they pretend to hate them, so that they too
may have their own lovers. But later, when the
wills are read, the bodyguard, for all their years of
service, are excluded, and the sons and Nature
herself, as is only right, prevail over all of them, and
they gnash their teeth in secret at having been made
to look such fools.

TERPSION True enough. Take me, for example—how much
of mine has Thucritus devoured! Yet he always
seemed on the point of death, and whenever I came
in, would be groaning to himself, and his voice would
be as faint and squeaky as an unfledged chicken
straight from the egg; and so I, thinking I’d be
putting him in his coffin any minute, would send in
most of what he got,
 
 so that my rivals in love should
not outdo me in generosity, and usually I lay awake
at night, sleepless with worry, calculating each penny
and arranging each move. It is this that has caused
my death—the loss of sleep and the worry. But he
gobbled down all that bait, and turned up the other
day to gloat at my funeral.

PLUTO Well done, Thucritus! Long may you live to
keep your wealth, and, at the same time, have the
laugh on fellows like that! May you never die till
you have seen the funeral of all these toadies! 

 TERPSION It will give me too, the greatest pleasure Pluto,
under the circumstances, if Charoeades is another
to die before Thucritus. 

 PLUTO Don’t worry, Terpsion. Not only he but Phidon
and Melanthus, and, in fact, all of them will come
here before him through the same worries. 

 TERPSION I’m glad to hear it. Long life to you, Thucritus.

ZENOPHANTUS Well, Callidemides, how did you die? I used to
be a parasite of Dinias, and choked myself to death
by eating too much, as you know; for you were
there when I died. 

 CALLIDEMIDES Yes, I was there, Zenophantus. But my death
was a strange one. I think you know Ptoeodorus,
the old man? 

 ZENOPHANTUS The rich man with no children? I knew you
were often with him. 

 CALLIDEMIDES I was always most attentive to him, because he
promised I would benefit by his death. But since
the matter was taking an unconscionable time, and
he was living to be older than Tithonus, I found a
short cut to the inheritance. I bought poison, and
persuaded his butler, next time he asked for wine—he’s
a pretty heavy drinker, you know—to have the
poison ready in the cup, and give it to him. I promised
him his freedom, if he did it. 

 ZENOPHANTUS Well, what happened? Your story looks like
being a strange one.

CALLIDEMIDES When we’d come in after our bath, the lad had
two cups ready, one with the poison for Ptoeodorus,
and the other for me, but somehow he made a
mistake, giving me the poison, and Ptoeodorus the
harmless cup. A moment later, while he was still
drinking, I was lying my full length on the floor, and
the wrong man was dead. Why do you find it
amusing, Zenophantus? You oughtn’t to laugh at
a friend. 

 ZENOPHANTUS Well, it was a droll thing to happen. But what
did the old man do? 

 CALLIDEMIDES At first he was a little put out by the suddenness
of it all, but then he understood what had happened,
I suppose, and laughed himself to see what his butler
had done. 

 ZENOPHANTUS But you oughtn’t to have taken that short cut;
you’d have been surer of getting him here by the
highway, even if he was a little slow in coming.

CNEMON It’s just like the proverb; the fawn’s caught the
lion. 


 
 DAMNIPPUS Why so angry, Cnemon? 

 CNEMON You ask why I’m angry? I’ve been outsmarted,
poor fool that I am, and have left an heir I didn’t
want, passing over those I’d have preferred to have
my property. 

 DAMNIPPUS How did it happen? 

 CNEMON I’d been showering my attentions on Hermolaus,
the childless millionaire, in hopes of his death, and
he was glad enough to have them. So I thought of
another clever move, and decided to make my will
public. I’ve left him all my property in it, hoping
he in turn would emulate me, and do the same by me. 

 DAMNIPPUS Well, what did he do? 

 CNEMON What he put in his own will, I don’t know; I can
only tell you that I myself died suddenly, when my
roof fell down upon me, and now Hermolaus is in
possession of my property, like a greedy bass that
has swallowed both hook and bait. 

 DAMNIPPUS Not only that, but he’s swallowed you the fisherman
as well; you’ve been caught by your own
cunning. 


 
 CNEMON So it seems; that’s why I’m so sorry for myself.

SIMYLUS So, you’ve come to join us at last, Polystratus,
after living to be, I think, almost a hundred? 

 POLYSTRATUS Ninety-eight, Simylus. 

 SIMYLUS Whatever sort of life did you have for these thirty
years after my death? I died when you were about seventy. 

 POLYSTRATUS An exceedingly pleasant life, even if you will think
it strange. 

 SIMYLUS Strange indeed, if you were not only old and weak
but also childless, and yet could enjoy life.

POLYSTRATUS At first, I could do anything. I still could enjoy
plenty of pretty boys, and the nicest women,
unguents and fragrant wine, and a table to outdo
any in Sicily. 

 SIMYLUS That’s something new. I knew you to be very sparing. 


 
 POLYSTRATUS Ah, but the good things came pouring in from
others, my good fellow; at crack of dawn crowds of
folk would start flocking to my doors, and later in
the day all kinds of choice gifts from every corner
of the earth would arrive. 

 SIMYLUS Did you become tyrant, Polystratus, after my time? 

 POLYSTRATUS No, but I had thousands of lovers. 

 SIMYLUS You make me laugh. Lovers? At your age?
With only four teeth in your head? 

 POLYSTRATUS Yes indeed, the noblest lovers in the city. Though
I was old and bald, as you see, yes, and blear-eyed
and snivelling too, they were delighted to court me,
and anyone of them I favoured with a mere glance
thought himself in heaven. 

 SIMYLUS You weren’t another to have a divine passenger,
as did Phaon,
 
 when he ferried Aphrodite over from
Chios, and have your prayers answered, becoming
young, handsome and attractive all over again? 

 POLYSTRATUS No, I was the desire of all, though just as you see
me now. 


 
 SIMYLUS You’re talking in riddles.

POLYSTRATUS Yet this great love for rich, childless old men is
there for all to see. 

 SIMYLUS Now I understand your beauty, you old wonder;
it came from the golden Aphrodite. 

 POLYSTRATUS And no small enjoyment, Simylus, my lovers have
brought me; I was almost worshipped by them.
Often I would be coy, and occasionally bar my door
to some of them, but they would vie with each other
in their zeal for my affection. 

 SIMYLUS But what decision did you make about your
property in the end? 

 POLYSTRATUS I would keep saying in public that I had left
each of them as my heir, and each would believe me,
and show himself more assiduous than ever in his
flattery; but all the time my real will was different
and I left them—instructions to go to the devil
one and all.

SIMYLUS And who was the heir under your final will? One
of your family, no doubt? 

 POLYSTRATUS Good heavens no; it was a pretty boy from
Phrygia I’d just bought. 


 
 SIMYLUS What sort of age was he? 

 POLYSTRATUS Roughly about twenty. 

 SIMYLUS Now I understand how he won your favour. 

 POLYSTRATUS Oh well, he deserved to be my heir much more
than they did, even if he was a barbarian and a pest.
He’s already being courted by the noblest of them
all. So he became my heir, and is now numbered
among the aristocrats, and, despite his smooth chin
and foreign accent, is credited with bluer blood than
Codrus, greater beauty than NIreus, and more
intelligence than Odysseus. 

 SIMYLUS That doesn’t worry me. Let him even be
Generalissimo of Greece, if he wishes to, so long as
those fellows don’t inherit.

CHARON Let me tell you how you stand; your boat is
small, as you can see, and unsound, and leaks almost
all over; if it lists one way or the other, it will
capsize and sink. Yet you come in such numbers
all at once, each of you laden with luggage. If, then,


 


you take all this on board, I’m afraid you’ll be sorry
for it later on, particularly those of you that can’t
swim. 

 DEAD MEN Well, what shall we do to have a good passage? 

 CHARON I’ll tell you. Strip yourselves before you come on
board, and leave all this useless stuff on the shore;
for, even then, the ferry will hardly hold you. It
will be up to you, Hermes, to let none of them
aboard after this, unless he has stripped himself and
thrown away his trappings, as I said he must. Go
and stand by the gangway, and sort them out for
admission. Make them strip, before you let them
on board.

HERMES Well spoken. Let’s do as you say. Who’s this
first one? 

 MENIPPUS I’m Menippus. But see, here’s my bag for you,
Hermes, and my stick; into the water with them.
My cloak I didn’t even bring—and a good job too! 

 HERMES Come on board, Menippus, best of men, and take
the seat of honour up beside the steersman, so that
you can keep an eye on the others.

And who’s this
handsome fellow? 

 CHARMOLEOS Charmoleos, the darling of Megara, whose kiss was
worth two talents. 


 
 HERMES Then off with your beauty and your lips, kisses
and all, your luxuriant hair, your rosy cheeks and all
your skin; that’s fine, now you’re travelling light,
and may come on board.

And who are you over
here, with the purple robe and diadem, you who
are so solemn? 

 LAMPICHUS Lampichus, tyrant of Gela. 

 HERMES Well why, Lampichus, do you bring all that with
you? 

 LAMPICHUS Well, what should I do? Ought a tyrant to come
naked, Hermes? 

 HERMES A tyrant shouldn’t, but a dead man most certainly
should. So off with it all. 

 LAMPICHUS There you are; there goes my wealth. 

 HERMES Away too with your vanity, Lampichus, and your
pride; they will weigh down the ferry, if they come
in along with you. 

 LAMPICHUS Then at least allow me to keep my diadem and
my mantle. 

 HERMES Certainly not; away with these too. 


 
 LAMPICHUS Very well. What else? I’ve thrown away
everything, as you can see. 

 HERMES There remain your cruelty, folly, insolence, and
temper; away with these too. 

 LAMPICHUS There you are; I’m stripped.

HERMES Now you may get in. You, the fat and fleshy one,
who are you? 

 DAMASIAS Damasias, the athlete. 

 HERMES Yes, you look like him. I know you, having often
seen you in the ring. 

 DAMASIAS Yes, Hermes; but let me in; I’m stripped to the
skin. 

 HERMES No, you’re not, my good fellow, not while you
have all that flesh on you. Well, take it off, for
you’ll sink the boat, if you only put one foot aboard.
Off too with those wreaths and proclamations of
your prowess. 

 DAMASIAS There you are; I’m really stripped now, as you
see, and no heavier than the other dead.

HERMES It’s better that you should be light like that; get
in then. You too, Craton, off with your wealth and
your effeminacy too, and your luxury, and don’t
bring your funeral trappings or your ancestors’
reputations, but leave behind family, fame, all
public proclamations in your honour, and the
inscriptions on your statues, and say nothing of the
mighty tomb they raised over your body. Even the
mention of such things weighs down the boat. 

 CRATON I don’t like it, but away they go. What choice
have I?

HERMES Good gracious! You there—what do you want
with all that armour? Why do you carry that
trophy? 

 GENERAL Because I was victorious, won the prize for valour,
and was honoured by my city. 

 HERMES Leave your trophy on earth above; there’s peace
in Hades and weapons won’t be needed.

But here’s
an august personage, to judge by his appearance,
and a proud man. Who can he be, with his haughty
eyebrows, thoughtful mien, and bushy beard? 

 MENIPPUS A Philosopher, Hermes, or rather an impostor, full
of talk of marvels. Strip him too, and you’ll see
many amusing things covered up under his cloak. 


 
 HERMES You there, off first with your clothes, and then with
all this here. Ye gods, what hypocrisy he carries,
what ignorance, contentiousness, vanity, unanswerable
puzzles, thorny argumentations, and complicated
conceptions—yes, and plenty of wasted effort,
and no little nonsense, and idle talk, and splitting of
hairs, and, good heavens, here’s gold too, and soft
living, shamelessness, temper, luxury, and effeminacy!
I can see them, however much you try to
hide them. Away with your falsehood too, and
your pride, and notions of your superiority over the
rest of men. If you came on board with all these,
not even a battleship would be big enough for you. 

 PHILOSOPHER Then I take them off, since these are your orders.

MENIPPUS But he ought to take off that beard as well,
Hermes; it’s heavy and shaggy, as you can see.
He has at least five pounds of hair there. 

 HERMES Well spoken. Off with that too. 

 PHILOSOPHER Who will be my barber? 

 HERMES Menippus here will take a shipwright’s axe and cut
it off; he can use the gangway as his block. 


 
 MENIPPUS No, Hermes, pass me up a saw. That’ll be better
fun. 

 HERMES The axe will do well enough. That’s fine. You
look more human, now that you’ve lost that goat’s
beard of yours. 

 MENIPPUS Shall I take a little off his eyebrows as well? 

 HERMES By all means; he has them rising high over his
forehead, as he strains after something or other.
What’s this? Crying, you scum? Afraid to face
death? Get in with you. 

 MENIPPUS He still has the heaviest thing of all under his arm. 

 HERMES What, Menippus? 

 MENIPPUS Flattery, Hermes, which was often most useful to
him in life. 

 PHILOSOPHER What about you then, Menippus? Off with your
independence, plain speaking, cheerfulness, noble
bearing, and laughter. You’re the only one that
laughs. 

 HERMES Do nothing of the sort, but keep them, Menippus;
they’re light and easy to carry, and useful for the


 


voyage.

But you, Rhetorician, throw away your
endless loquacity, your antitheses, balanced clauses,
periods, foreign phrases, and everything else that
makes your speeches so heavy. 

 RHETORICIAN Look, away they go. 

 HERMES Good. Loose the hawsers, then, let’s pull in the
gangway, raise anchor and spread the sail, and you,
Charon, take the rudder and see to the steering, and
good luck to us.

Why are you groaning like that,
you fools, and you, in particular, the Philosopher
just despoiled of the beard? 

 PHILOSOPHER Because, Hermes, I thought my soul was immortal. 

 MENIPPUS He’s lying; something else seems to be grieving him. 

 HERMES What? 

 MENIPPUS That he’ll have no more expensive dinners, or go
out at night, unknown to all, with his cloak wrapped
over his head, and go the round of the brothels,
and never again take money next morning for
cheating the young men with his show of wisdom.
That’s what grieves him. 


 
 PHILOSOPHER Aren’t you sorry to die yourself, Menippus? 

 MENIPPUS How so, when I was eager for death
 
 and needed
no invitation?

But, as I speak, don’t I hear the
noise of what seems to be shouting on earth? 

 HERMES Yes, Menippus, and coming from several quarters.
In one place they’ve all flocked to the assembly, glad
and laughing over the death of Lampichus, while
the women have got hold of his wife, and his tiny
children too are being pelted by the other children
with showers of stones. Then there are others, in
Sicyon, applauding Diophantus, the Rhetorician, for
his funeral speech over Craton here; and, upon my
word, there’s the mother of Damasias wailing with
the other women, and leading the dirge over him.
But nobody weeps for you, Menippus; you’re the
only one lying in peace.

MENIPPUS Not so; soon you’ll hear the dogs howling most
piteous laments over me, and the ravens flapping
their wings in mourning, when they gather and
perform my burial. 

 HERMES You’re a man of spirit, Menippus. But, now that
we’ve reached port, off to the court with you along
that straight path, while the ferryman and I go for
another lot. 


 
 MENIPPUS A good voyage to you, Hermes; but let’s be on
our way too. Why do you keep on lingering? We
shall have to be judged, and they say the sentences
are heavy, wheels and stones and vultures; and the
life of each of us will be revealed.

CRATES Diogenes, did you know Moerichus, the rich man,
the millionaire from Corinth, who owned a fleet of
merchant ships, and had a cousin called Aristeas,
another rich man, who used to quote Homer and
say, “You try to throw me, or let me try to throw
you”?
 
 

 DIOGENES Why, Crates? 

 CRATES They were of an age and showering attentions
each on the other for his property. They made no
secret of their wills; Moerichus was leaving Aristeas
master of all he had, if he died first, and Aristeas was
doing the same for Moerichus. This was all down in
black and white, and they tried to outdo each other
with obsequious attentions, and not only the
prophets, divining the future from stars or from




 


dreams in the best Chaldaean tradition, but even the
Delphic god himself would assign the victory first to
Aristeas, and then to Moerichus, and the scales would
dip in favour now of one, now of the other.

DIOGENES Well, what happened in the end? The story’s
worth hearing. 

 CRATES Both have died on one day, and the properties
have passed on to Eunomius and Thrasycles, two
relations who have never imagined things turning
out thus. Their ship was halfway across from
Sicyon to Cirrha, when a squall from the north-west
caught her on the beam and capsized her.

DIOGENES And a good thing too! We never had such
thoughts about each other, when we were alive.
I never prayed for the death of Antisthenes, so that
I could inherit his staff—though he had a very
strong one that he had made for himself from the
wild olive—nor did you, Crates, I imagine, wish that
I should die and leave you my property, the tub
and the bag with its two measures of lupines. 

 CRATES No, I didn’t need any of these things; but neither
did you, Diogenes. All that was needful you inherited
from Antisthenes and I from you—things far
more important and august than the Persian empire. 


 
 DIOGENES What things do you mean? 

 CRATES Wisdom, independence, truth, plain speaking,
freedom. 

 DIOGENES Good heavens, yes. I remember taking over these
riches from Antisthenes, and leaving you them in
still greater measure.

CRATES But no one else cared for wealth of this sort, or
paid us attentions in the hope of inheriting it from
us; it was gold on which they all had their eyes. 

 DIOGENES Only to be expected; they had nowhere to put
such a legacy from us. They were falling apart
from rich living, and were like rotten purses; and
so no sooner did one put wisdom or plain speech or
truth into them, than it would fall out through a
hole, for the bottom couldn’t hold it. It was just
like what happens to those daughters of Danaus here,
as they pour water into that jar full of holes. But
their gold they would keep safe with teeth or nails or
any means in their power. 

 CRATES In consequence we shall retain our wealth even
down here, but they will bring with them no more
than an obol, and even that won’t go beyond the
ferryman.

DIOGENES Seeing that we’ve nothing to do, Antisthenes and
Crates, why don’t we make straight for the entrance,
to have a walk around, and see what the newcomers
are like, and how each of them acts? 

 ANTISTHENES Let’s do that, Diogenes. It will be a pleasant
sight to see some of them weeping, others begging
to be let go, and some most reluctant to come down,
resisting, though Hermes pushes them along head
foremost, lying on their backs, and bracing their
bodies against him. Quite unnecessary behaviour! 

 CRATES Then I’ll tell you what I saw on my way down. 

 DIOGENES Do tell us, Crates. It looks as though what you
saw was really amusing.

CRATES We had quite a crowd with us on our way down,
but the most distinguished were our rich countryman
 

Ismenodorus, Arsaces, governor of Media, and
Oroetes the Armenian. Well, Ismenodorus, who’d
been killed by bandits on his way past Cithaeron to



 


Eleusis, I believe, was groaning, holding his wound
with both hands, and calling upon the young
children he had left behind, reproaching himself for
his rashness in only bringing two servants when
crossing Cithaeron and passing the district round
Eleutherae, when it had been desolated by the wars,
although he was taking five golden bowls and four
cups with him.

Arsaces, an old man, and, in all
truth, not undignified to look at, showed his annoyance
in true barbarian fashion at having to walk,
and kept calling for his horse; for his horse had been
killed with him, both pierced by the same blow from
a Thracian targeteer in the fight with the Cappadocians
by the Araxes. Arsaces was riding, he told
us, a long way ahead of the rest, when the Thracian,
standing his ground and crouching beneath his
shield, parried his lance, and, planting his pike
beneath him, pierced both man and horse with it.

ANTISTHENES How, Crates, could that be done by one blow? 

 CRATES Very easily, Antisthenes. He rode to the attack
with his twenty cubit lance levelled, but the
Thracian parried his thrust with his target, and,
when the point had passed him, bent down on one
knee, and, meeting the charge with his pike, wounded









 


the chest of the horse, which impaled itself by its
own fire and force, while Arsaces too was run right
through from groin to buttock. You see what
happened; it was done, not by the Thracian, but
rather by the horse. However, Arsaces was annoyed
at having no more honour than the rest, and wanted
to come down on horseback.

Oroetes had very tender
feet, and couldn’t even stand on the ground, much
less walk. All Medes are just like that, once they’re
off their horses; like men walking on thistles, they
go on tiptoe and can hardly move. So he threw
himself down and lay there and defied all efforts to
put him on his feet. But Hermes, excellent fellow,
picked him up and carried him all the way to the
ferry. How I laughed!

ANTISTHENES So did I, when I came down. I didn’t mix with
the rest, but left them to their groans, and ran on
ahead to the ferry, and made sure of a comfortable
place for the voyage. During the crossing, they
cried and were seasick, but I found it all most
enjoyable.

DIOGENES So such, my friends, were your companions on
the journey; for my part, I came down with
Blepsias, the money-lender from the Piraeus, Lampis,
the free-lance officer from Acarnania, and Damis, the
rich man from Corinth. Damis had been poisoned
by his son, Lampis had committed suicide out of


 


love for Myrtium, the courtesan, while Blepsias, poor
fellow, was said to have starved to death, and you
could see quite clearly that he was pale in the
extreme and completely wasted away. I knew how
they died, but I asked just the same. Then, when
Damis railed at his son, I said to him, “But your
treatment at his hands was quite just, if you, who
had a thousand talents in all, and lived a life of
pleasure at ninety, wouldn’t allow your eighteen-year-old
son any more than fourpence. And
you, the gentleman from Acarnania” (for he was
groaning too, and cursing Myrtium) “why do you
blame Love instead of yourself as you should?
Though you never showed fear in the face of the
enemy, but would always court danger and fight in
front of the others, yet, for all your courage, you
admitted defeat to a quite ordinary wench with her
artificial tears and lamentations.” As for Blepsias,
he was the first to accuse himself of great folly in
hoarding his money for heirs who were unrelated,
thinking in his folly that he would live for ever.
But they afforded me uncommon pleasure by their
lamentations on that occasion.

But here we are at the entrance. We must look
out and watch the distance for the first appearance
of the newcomers. Hullo! What a crowd! What
an assortment! And all crying except for those
children and infants! Yes, even the oldest among
them are in tears. Why such behaviour? Does
Life hold them in her spell through a love-potion?

I’d like to put a question to this hoary old fellow.
Why do you weep at having died at your age?
Why, good sir, are you so annoyed, though you’ve
come here only in old age? Were you a king? 


 
 BEGGAR By no means. 

 DIOGENES A satrap? 

 BEGGAR Not that either. 

 DIOGENES Were you rich, then, and grieve at having left
great luxury by your death? 

 BEGGAR Nothing of the kind. I was about ninety years
old, I got a poor living by rod and line, I was utterly
penniless, had no children, and besides all that, was
lame and half blind. 

 DIOGENES And in spite of your condition you still wanted to
live? 

 BEGGAR Yes, for the light was sweet to me, and death was
a frightening thing and to be avoided. 

 DIOGENES You’re out of your mind, old fellow, and acting
just like a boy, with such timidity in the face of the
inevitable, though you’re as old as our ferryman.
Why should we talk any more about the young, when
men as old as you are such lovers of life, men who
ought to be eager for death as a cure for the evils of
old age? But let’s be off now, or we may be suspected
of plotting our escape, if we’re seen crowding
round the entrance.

AGAMEMNON If you went mad, Ajax, and killed only yourself,
instead of all of us as you had intended, why do you
blame Odysseus? Why wouldn’t you look at him
the other day, when he came to consult the prophet,
 

or even deign to speak to your fellow-soldier and
comrade, but went striding past him with your head
in the air? 

 AJAX And quite right, too, Agamemnon. He was personally
to blame for my madness, by being my only
rival for the arms.
 
 

 AGAMEMNON Did you expect to be unopposed and to overcome
us all without a struggle? 

 AJAX Yes, under the circumstances. The armour
belonged to me by natural right, as it was my cousin’s,
and the rest of you, though far superior to him,
wouldn’t compete, but left the prize for me; the
son of Laertes, however, whom I’d often saved when
in danger of being cut to pieces by the Phrygians,
claimed he was my superior and more deserving of
the arms.

AGAMEMNON Blame Thetis, then, my good man. She ought to
have left you the arms as a legacy to a kinsman, but
she brought them and delivered them up to the
community. 

 AJAX No, Odysseus is to blame, as the only one to make
a rival claim. 

 AGAMEMNON There’s some excuse for him, Ajax, as he’s only a
man, and was eager for glory, the sweetest thing of
all, the thing for which each of us faced danger,
especially as he was judged your better—and, what’s
more, by Trojans.
 
 

 AJAX I know who voted against me, but it’s not right
to discuss the gods. However, as far as Odysseus
is concerned, I couldn’t stop myself from hating
him, even if Athena herself ordered me to do so.

MINOS Let this pirate, Sostratus, be cast into Pyriphlegethon,
the temple-robber be torn apart by





 


Chimera, and the tyrant he stretched alongside
Tityus, Hermes, and have his liver too torn by the
vultures; but you good ones go off with all speed
to the Elysian Fields, and live in the Isles of the
Blest, as a reward for your just dealings in life. 

 SOSTRATUS Listen, Minos, and see if what I say is just. 

 MINOS Listen again now ? Haven’t you already been
found guilty of wickedness, Sostratus, and of committing
all these murders? 

 SOSTRATUS I admit I have, but consider whether it will be
just for me to be punished. 

 MINOS Of course it will, if it is just to pay the proper
penalty. 

 SOSTRATUS But answer me this, Minos. My question will be
a short one. 

 MINOS Speak on, then, only be brief, so that we can settle
the other cases at once.

SOSTRATUS Were my actions in life carried out by me of my
own will, or already spun for me by Fate? 

 MINOS Already spun by Fate, of course. 


 
 SOSTRATUS Then all of us, whether we are thought good or
bad, acted as we did as the servants of Fate? 

 MINOS Yes, as servants of Clotho, who has ordained for
each of us at birth what he must do. 

 SOSTRATUS If, then, a man is forced by another man to kill,
and is unable to gainsay the compulsion he brings
to bear, if, for instance, he is a public executioner,
or a mercenary, obeying, in one case, a judge, and,
in the other, a tyrant, whom will you hold responsible
for the killing? 

 MINOS Clearly the judge or the tyrant, since the actual
sword can’t be blamed; for it merely serves as a
tool to serve the passion of the person who is responsible
in the first instance. 

 SOSTRATUS Many thanks, Minos, for your generous elaboration
of my example. And, if some one brings with his
own hands gold or silver sent by his master, whom
must we thank and record as the benefactor? 

 MINOS The sender, Sostratus; the bringer was merely a
servant.

SOSTRATUS Don’t you see then how wrong it is for you to
punish us, who have been the servants of the commands
of Clotho, and to have shown honour to those
who ministered to the good deeds of others? No
one can say that it was possible for us to gainsay
ordinances that are all-compelling. 

 MINOS These are not the only illogicalities you could find,
Sostratus, by examining things carefully. However,
you shall have your reward for your persistent
questions, as I can see you’re not merely a pirate
but also something of a master in the art of argument.
Set him free, Hermes, and have his punishment
stopped. But take care, fellow, that you don’t
teach the other shades to ask questions like that.

ALEXANDER I should be preferred
 
 to you, Libyan; I’m the
better man. 

 HANNIBAL No, I should. 

 ALEXANDER Let Minos decide, then. 


 
 MINOS Who are you? 

 ALEXANDER This is Hannibal of Carthage, and I am Alexander,
son of Philip. 

 MINOS Both famous indeed. But what are you disputing? 

 ALEXANDER The first place. He says
 
 he was a better General
than I was, but I say, as is known to all, that in the
arts of war I was superior not only to him, but to
pretty well every one who went before me. 

 MINOS Then let each of you speak in turn; you start,
Libyan.

HANNIBAL I’ve one thing to be thankful for, Minos, for, while
I’ve been here, I’ve added Greek
 
 to my other
accomplishments; he won’t, as a result, have the
advantage of me even in that. I maintain that
those are most deserving of praise who began from
nothing, and yet advanced to greatness by their own
efforts, by winning power for themselves and being
thought worthy of command. Thus it was that I,
setting out for Spain with a few followers, served at





 


first as my brother’s lieutenant,
 
 and then was
thought worthy of the highest command, because
I was judged to be the best man, and conquered the
Celtiberians, mastered the Gauls of the West,
 
 crossed
the mighty mountains, overran the whole Po Valley,
devastated all those cities, subdued the plains of
Italy, reached the outskirts of the greatest city of
all, and killed so many in one day, that I measured
their rings by the bushel, and bridged rivers with the
dead. Moreover, I did all this without being called
the son of Ammon, or pretending to be a god, or
recounting dreams of my mother, but I admitted
I was a man, I matched myself against the most
accomplished Generals, and locked myself in battle
with the finest of soldiers. My opponents were no
Medes or Armenians who flee before they are pursued
and yield immediate victory to anyone who shows
a bold front.

But Alexander inherited his kingdom
from his father, and was helped in enlarging it and
extending it so far by the impetus of fortune. In
any case, when he was victorious, and had defeated
that contemptible Darius at Issus and Arbela,
he renounced the traditions of his fathers; he
demanded the worship of men; he changed over to
the Median way of life; at his banquets he murdered
his friends or arrested them to have them killed.
But I led my country as her equal, and, when she
sent for me, after the enemy had invaded Africa with
a great force, I promptly obeyed, gave myself up as





 


a private citizen, and, when tried and condemned,
accepted it without rancour. All this did I do,
although I was a barbarian without the advantage
of a Greek education, and unable to declaim Homer
like him.
 
 I had no education under Professor
Aristotle, but relied solely on my natural gifts.
These are the things in which I claim to excel
Alexander. If he is more handsome because he wore
a diadem on his head—well, perhaps Macedonians
respect such things, but he cannot be thought better
for that reason than a noble and skilful General who
depended more on his own intellect than on fortune. 

 MINOS This is no mean speech that he’s made on his own
behalf, and not at all what one would have expected
from a Libyan. What have you to say to this,
Alexander?

ALEXANDER A man so impudent, Minos, deserves no answer.
Common report suffices to show you what a king
I was and what a brigand he was. But consider
whether I was not greatly superior to him. I was
still young when I came to power, put an end to the
disorders of my kingdom, and punished my father’s
murderers. Then I struck fear into Hellas by the
destruction of the Thebans, and was elected her
leader, but I was not content to govern Macedonia,
and rule only the domain left to me by my father,
but, thinking in terms of the whole world, and considering
it a disgrace not to conquer it all, I invaded
Asia with a few men, was victorious in a great battle
at the Granicus, took over Lydia, and, subduing




 


Ionia, Phrygia, and, in short, whatever lay before
me, reached Issus, where Darius awaited me at the
head of countless thousands of men.

The result
you all know, Minos, and the numbers of dead I sent
down to you in a single day. The ferryman certainly
says that his boat could not cope with them
on that occasion, but that the majority of them
made their own rafts and crossed over in that way.
Moveover, while doing this, I faced danger at the
head of my men, and did not object to wounds.
Not to speak of what happened at Tyre and Arbela,
I marched as far as India, making the Ocean the
boundary of my empire. I kept their elephants
 

and overcame Porus; I crossed the Tanais, and
defeated the Scythians, formidable foes, in a mighty
cavalry battle; I treated my friends well, and wrought
vengeance on my enemies. Even if men did think
me a god, they had some excuse for such beliefs
about me in view of the greatness of my achievements.

Last of all, I died a king, whereas he died an
exile, at the court of Prusias of Bithynia—a proper
end for so exceedingly wicked and cruel a man. Take
for instance his conquests in Italy. I won’t mention
that these were achieved not by might, but by
knavery and treachery and deceit, but of open
legitimate warfare there was nothing at all; but
when he reproaches me with luxurious living, I think
the distinguished gentleman has forgotten how he
behaved in Capua, consorting with loose women,
and wasting in debauchery his opportunities for
victory in the war. But suppose I hadn’t despised
the west, and preferred to march against the east,




 


what great feat would I have accomplished by a
bloodless conquest of Italy and the subjection of
Libya and everything as far as Gades? But I didn’t
think it worth fighting against peoples who were
already cowering before me, and ready to admit
me their master, I have had my say. Do you,
Minos, make you decision. Though I could have
said much, this is enough.

SCIPIO Do not do so yet, but hear what I have to say. 

 MINOS Who are you, my good man? Where do you
come from, that you wish to speak? 

 SCIPIO From Italy. I am Scipio, the General who
destroyed Carthage,
 
 and overcame the Libyans in
mighty battle. 

 MINOS Well, what have you to say? 

 SCIPIO That I am a lesser man than Alexander, but
superior to Hannibal, for I drove him before me,
after defeating him, and forcing him to flee ignominiously.
Is he not shameless, then, in posing as
the rival of Alexander, with whom even I, Scipio, the
conqueror of Hannibal, do not presume to compare
myself? 


 
 MINOS By heaven, what you say, Scipio, is reasonable!
So let Alexander be adjudged
 
 first, and after him
you, and then, if you don’t mind, Hannibal third,
though even he is of no little account.

ANTILOCHUS I was surprised at what you had to say the other
day, Achilles, to Odysseus on the subject of death.
What ignoble words! What little credit they
reflected on both of your teachers, Chiron and
Phoenix! I was listening, you know, when you said
you would gladly “if but on earth above” be thrall
to any man “whose lot is poverty, whose substance
small”, rather than be king of all the dead.
 
 To
speak thus might perhaps have been right for some
mean cowardly Phrygian, who loves life regardless
of honour, but for the son of Peleus, who surpassed
all the heroes in his love of danger, to have such
mean ideas for himself is utterly shameful, and
opposed to the way you acted in life; for, though
you could have had a long and obscure reign in
the land of Phthia, you gladly preferred death with
glory.

ACHILLES But in those days, son of Nestor, I still had no
experience of this place, and, not knowing which





 


existence was preferable, I preferred that miserable
empty shadow of glory to life itself; but now I
realise that glory is useless, however much men above
hymn its praises, that among the dead all have
but equal honour, and neither the beauty nor the
strength we had remain with us, but we lie buried
in the same darkness, all of us quite alike, and no
better one than the other, and I am neither feared
by the Trojan dead nor respected by the Greeks, but
there is complete equality of speech and one dead
man is like another, “be he mean or be he great”.
 

That’s why I’m distressed and annoyed at not being
a thrall alive on earth.

ANTILOCHUS But what can one do about it, Achilles? Nature
has decreed that, come what may, all men must die;
we must, therefore, abide by her law, and not be
distressed at the way she orders things. In any case
you can see such of us, your old companions,
as are present here, and assuredly, Odysseus too
will join us down here before very long. It’s a
comfort that all share in this, and that one doesn’t
suffer this alone and by oneself. You can see
Heracles and Meleager and other great men, who
would, I think, refuse a return to earth, if they were
sent up to be thralls to poor men without substance.

ACHILLES You give your advice out of friendship; but
somehow I am distressed by my memory of life
above, just as I think each of you is. If you won’t
admit it, you show yourselves my inferiors, by
submitting to it without protest. 


 
 ANTILOCHUS No, but your betters, Achilles. We see the uselessness
of speaking. We’ve resolved to say nothing,
and to bear and endure it all, for fear that we too
become a laughing-stock, as you have by indulging
in wishes of that sort.

AEACUS Why do you dash at Helen, and choke her,
Protesilaus? 

 PROTESILAUS It was because of her that I was killed, Aeacus,
and left my house half-built,
 
 and my newly-wed
wife a widow. 

 AEACUS Then blame Menelaus, for taking you to Troy to
fight for a woman like that. 

 PROTESILAUS Quite right. I should blame him. 

 MENELAUS Don’t blame me, my good man; it would be
fairer to blame Paris. Though I was his host, he
carried off my wife with him, contrary to all justice.
Paris ought to be strangled, and not by you only,
but by all the soldiers on both sides, for bringing
death to so many. 


 
 PROTESILAUS A better idea; then you, accursed Paris,
 
 are the
one I’ll keep forever in my grip. 

 PARIS That would be unjust too, Protesilaus, for I
practise the same craft as you; I’m a lover too, and
subject to the same god; you know how it’s none of
our wishing, but some divine power leads us wherever
it chooses, and it’s impossible to resist him.

PROTESILAUS True enough. Well, I wish I could catch Eros
here. 

 AEACUS I will answer you in defence of Eros. He will say
that he may have been the cause of the love of
Paris, but that you, Protesilaus, were the sole cause
of your own death; for, when your fleet was
approaching the land of Troy, you forgot your new-wed
wife, and made that mad adventurous leap
ashore before any of the others; you were in love
with glory, and because of her were the first to die
at the landing of the army. 

 PROTESILAUS Then, Aeacus, I shall retort with an even stronger
argument in my defence; the responsibility lies not
with me, but with Fate and the way the thread was
spun from the start. 

 AEACUS Quite right; why, then, blame the present
company?

PROTESILAUS O master and king, and Zeus of our world, and
you, daughter of Demeter, scorn not a lover’s
prayer. 

 PLUTO What do you ask of us? Who are you? 

 PROTESILAUS I am Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus, from Phylace,
one who served with the Achaean army, and first
man to die at Troy. I beg to be released and
restored to life for a little. 

 PLUTO That’s a love that’s common to all the dead, but
will come to pass for none of them. 

 PROTESILAUS My love, Aidoneus, is not for life, but for my wife,
whom, while still but newly wed, I left in her bower
and sailed away; and then, by evil fortune, I was
slain by Hector, while I was landing; and so my
love for my wife is eating my heart out, my lord;
could I be restored to her sight even for a short
while, I would gladly return here again.

PLUTO Have you not drunk, Protesilaus, from the waters
of Lethe? 

 PROTESILAUS Deeply have I drunk, my lord, but my affliction
was too strong. 

 PLUTO Then be patient; in time, she will join you here;
you won’t have to go up there. 

 PROTESILAUS I can’t bear to wait, Pluto. You’ve been in love
yourself, before now, Pluto, and know what it’s like. 

 PLUTO What good will it do you to return to life for a
single day, if shortly afterwards you must bewail
the same misfortune? 

 PROTESILAUS I think I’ll be able to persuade her to follow me
here, so that soon you’ll have two of us dead instead
of one. 

 PLUTO All this would be wrong, and has never happened
before.

PROTESILAUS Let me refresh your memory, Pluto. You gave
up Eurydice to Orpheus for this very reason, and
sent back my kinswoman, Alcestis,
 
 1 as a favour to
Heracles. 


 
 PLUTO Do you want that fair bride of yours to see you as
you are now—a bare unsightly skull? What sort of a
welcome will she give you, if she can’t even recognise
you? She’ll be frightened, I’m sure, and run away
from you, and you’ll find your long journey up to
earth to have been a waste of time. 

 PERSEPHONE Then, dear husband, you must put matters right,
and instruct Hermes to touch Protesilaus with his
wand the moment he’s in the light, and make him
the handsome youth he was when he left the bridal
chamber. 

 PLUTO Well, Hermes, since Persephone agrees, take him
up and make him into a bridegroom again. And
you, sir, remember you’ve only been given one day.

DIOGENES Why, Carian, are you so proud, and expect to be
honoured above all of us? 

 MAUSOLUS Firstly, Sinopean, because of my royal position.
I was king of all Caria, ruler also of part of Lydia,
subdued some islands, too, and advanced as far as
Miletus, subjugating most of Ionia. Moreover, I was


 


handsome and tall and mighty in war. But, most
important of all, I have lying over me in Halicarnassus
a vast memorial, outdoing that of any other
of the dead not only in size but also in its finished
beauty, with horses and men reproduced most
perfectly in the fairest marble, so that it would be
difficult to find even a temple like it. Don’t you
think I’ve a right to be proud of these things?

DIOGENES Of your royal position, you say, and your beauty,
and the weight of your tomb? 

 MAUSOLUS Good heavens, yes. 

 DIOGENES But, my handsome Mausolus, the strength and
the beauty you mention aren’t still with you here.
If we chose a judge of beauty, I can’t see why your
skull should be thought better than mine. Both
of them are bald and bare, both of us show our teeth
in the same way, and have lost our eyes, and have
snub noses now. Perhaps your tomb and all that
costly marble may give the people of Halicarnassus
something to show off, and they can boast to strangers
of the magnificent building they have, but I
can’t see what good it is to you, my good fellow,
unless you’re claiming that, with all that marble
pressing down on you, you have a heavier burden
to bear than any of us.

MAUSOLUS Will all that, then, be of no good to me? Will
Mausolus and Diogenes be on an equal footing? 


 
 DIOGENES No indeed, your excellency; we shan’t be on an
equal footing. Mausolus will groan when he
remembers the things on earth above, which he
thought brought him happiness, while Diogenes will
be able to laugh at him. Mausolus will talk of the
tomb erected to him at Halicarnassus by his wife
and sister, Artemisia, whereas Diogenes has no idea
whether he even has a tomb for his body, for he
didn’t care about that, but he has left for the best
of those who come after the report that he has lived
the life of a man, a life, most servile of Carians, that
towers above your memorial, and is built on surer
foundations.

NIREUS Look, here’s Menippus, who will decide which of
us is more handsome. Tell us, Menippus, don’t you
think I am? 

 MENIPPUS Whoever are you both? I ought to know that
first, I suppose. 

 NIREUS NIreus and Thersites. 

 MENIPPUS Well, which is NIreus, and which Thersites?
That’s still not clear. 


 
 THERSITES That’s already one point in my favour, if I’m like
you, and you don’t have the great superiority for
which Homer the blind praised you, when he called
you the most handsome of them all; I, with my
sugarloaf head, and thin hair,
 
 seemed just as good-looking
as you to Minos; but you , Menippus, take a
good look to see which you think more handsome. 

 IREUS Me , son of Charops and Aglaea, “handsomest man
of all who came to Troy”.

MENIPPUS But not, methinks, the handsomest that has come
to the lower world; your bones are no different here,
and your skull can only be told from that of Thersites,
by its brittleness. Your skull is fragile and unmanly. 

 NIREUS But just ask Homer what I was like when I was
fighting in the Greek army. 

 MENIPPUS You talk of dreams; I of what I see, and of your
present state; your past is only known to the men
of that time. 

 NIREUS Then, Menippus, I’m not handsomer here than he is? 


 
 MENIPPUS Neither you nor anyone else is handsome here.
In Hades all are equal, and all alike. 

 THERSITES That’s good enough for me .