MENIPPUS 
It was three thousand furlongs, then, from the
earth to the moon, my first stage; and from there up
to the sun perhaps five hundred leagues; and from
the sun to Heaven itself and the citadel of Zeus
would be also a day’s ascent for an eagle travelling
light.
 
 FRIEND 
In the name of the Liberal Arts, Menippus, why
are you playing astronomer and surveyor on the
quiet like that? For a long time I have been
following you about and listening to your outlandish
talk about suns and moons and even those outworn
topics, stages and leagues.
 
 MENIPPUS 
Don’t be surprised, my friend, if my talk seems to
you to be.up in the air and flighty; I am just
figuring up the total length of my recent journey.
 
 FRIEND 
So you did like the Phoenicians, old chap, and
guessed your way by the stars ¢
 
 MENIPPUS 
No indeed, I made my journey right among the
stars,

 

 FRIEND 
Great Heracles! That's a long dream you are
talking of, if you actually lost yourself and slept for
leagues and leagues !

MENIPPUS 
Dream, man! Do you think I’m telling you a
dream? [am just back from a visit to Zeus.
 
 FRIEND 
What’s that you say? Menippus here from
Heaven, dropt from the clouds ?
 
 MENIPPUS 
Here I an, I tell you, just come back to-day from
the very presence of your great Zeus himself, and I
have seen and heard wonderful things. If you don’t
believe me, I am overjoyed precisely because my
good luck is beyond belief,
 
 FRIEND 
Why, my divine Menippus, my Olympian Menippus,
how can a mortal groundling like myself disbelieve
a sky-man—in fact, to use the words of Homer, a
son of Heaven? But tell ine, please, how you
were carried aloft, and where you got so long a
ladder ; for as far as looks go you are too little like
the lad of Phrygia for us to suppose that, like hii,
you were snatched up by the eagle to become a cupbearer. 

 MENIPPUS 
You have clearly been making fun of me this long
time, and it is no wonder you think that my strange
story is like a fairy-tale. However, I had no need
of your ladder; for my ascent, nor yet to become the
eagle’s pet, for I had wings of my own.

 

 FRIEND 
You have improved on Daedalus, by what you say,
if over and above all else, you have turned from a
man to a hawk or a crow without our knowing it.
 
 MENIPPUS 
Your guess is well-aimed, my friend, and hits the
bull’s-eye ; for I myself constructed wings, patterned
after Daedalus’ clever invention.

FRIEND 
Of all the foolhardy men in the world! Then
you weren’t afraid you would fall into the water
somewhere and give us a Menippean Sea named
after yourself, to match the Icarian ?
 
 MENIPPUS 
Not at all; Icarus had his feathers fitted on with
wax, and so just as soon as that melted in the
sun he shed his plumage, of course, and fell down ;
but my wings were innocent of wax.
 
 FRIEND 
What do you mean? For by now, sofhehow or
other, you are gradually inclining me to believe in
the truth of your story.
 
 MENIPPUS 
This is what I mean; taking a good large eagle
and also a strong vulture and cutting off their wings,
joints and all—but I'll tell you the whole scheme
from first to last, if you have time.
 
 FRIEND 
By all means; here I am in suspense, thanks to
what you have said, and already waiting with open
mouth for the end of your tale. In the name of
Friendship, don’t leave me hanging by the ears
somewhere in the midst of the story.

MENIPPUS 
Listen then, for a friend left in the lurch with his
mouth open would be anything but a pretty spectacle,
especially if he were hanging by the ears, as you say
you are.
As soon as I began to find, in the course of my
investigation of life, that all objects of human
endeavour are ridiculous and trivial and insecure
(wealth, I mean, and office and sovereign power),
contemning those things and assuming that the
effort to get them was an obstacle to getting things
truly worth effort, I undertook to lift my eyes and
contemplate the universe. In so doing I was caused
great perplexity, first of all by what the philosophers
call the Cosmos, for I could not discover how it came
into being or who made it, or its source or purpose.
Then in examining it part by part I was compelled
to rack my brains still more, for I saw the stars
scattered hap-hazard about the sky, and I wanted to
know what the sun itself could be. Above all, the
peculiarities of the moon seemed to me extraordinary
and completely paradoxical, and I conjectured that
her multiplicity of shapes had some hidden reason.
More than that, lightning flashing and thunder
crashing and rain or snow or hail driving down were
all hard to interpret and impossible to reason out.

Being in that state of mind, I thought it best to
learn about all these points from the philosophers,
for I supposed that they surely would be able to tell
the whole truth.” So I picked out the best of them,
as far as I could judge from their dourness of visage,

 

paleness of complexion and length of beard; and as
the gentlemen at once struck me as being extremely
tall talkers and high thinkers, I put myself i in their
hands, paying down part of a good round sum on
the spot and contracting to pay the balance later,
on completion of my course in philosophy; and
then I expected to be taught how to hold forth
on the Heavens and to learn the system of the
universe. But they were so far from ridding me of
my old-time ignorance that they plunged me forthwith into even greater perplexities by flooding me
every day with first causes, final causes, atoms, voids,
elements, concepts, and all that sort of thing. But
the hardest part of it all, in my opinion at least, was
that although no one of them agreed with anyone
else in anything he said, but all their statements
were contradictory and inconsistent, they nevertheless expected to persuade me and each tried to win
me over to his own doctrine.
 
 FRIEND 
Extraordinary that learned men quarrelled with
each other about their doctrines and did not hold
the same views about the same things !

MENIPPUS 
Indeed, my friend, it will make you laugh to hear
about the way they bragged and worked wonders
in their talk! Why, in the first place, they-stood
on the ground and were not a bit better than the
rest of us who walk the earth; in fact, they were
not even sharper sighted than their neighbours, but
some of them were actually purblind through age or
idleness. In spite of that, however, they claimed to
discern the boundaries of Heaven, they measured

 

the sun, they visited the spheres beyond the moon,
and you would have thought they had fallen from
the stars from the way they told about their
magnitudes and presumed to say just how many
cubits it is in distance from the sun to the moon,
often, perhaps, without even knowing how many
furlongs it is from Megara to Athens. And not only
did they measure the height of the air and the depth
of the sea and the circumference of the earth, but by
the description of circles and the construction of
triangles on squares and of imultiple spheres they
actually measured out the cubic content of the
Heavens.

Moreover, was it not silly and completely absurd
that when they were talking about things so uncertain they did not make a single assertion
hypothetically but were vehement in their insistence
and gave the rest no chance to outdo them in
exaggeration; all but swearing that the sun is a mass
of molten metal, that the moon is inhabited, and
that the stars drink water, the sun drawing up the
moisture from the sea with a rope and bucket, as it
were, and distributing the beverage to all of them
in order?

As for the contradictory nature of their theories,
that is easy to appreciate. Just see for yourself, in
Heaven’s name, whether their doctrines are akin and
not widely divergent. First of all, there is their
difference of opinion about the universe. Some

 

think it is without beginning and without end, but
others have even ventured to tell who made it and
how it was constructed; and these latter surprised
me most, for they made some god or other the
creator of the universe, but did not tell where he
came from or where he stood when he created it all;
and yet it is impossible to conceive of time and
space before the genesis of the universe.
 
 FRIEND 
They are very presumptuous charlatans by what
you say, Menippus.
 
 MENIPPUS 
But my dear man, what if I should tell you all they
said about “ideas” and incorporeal entities, or their
theories about the finite and the infinite? On the
latter point also they had a childish dispute, some
of them setting a limit to the universe and others
considering it to be unlimited; nay more, they asserted that there are many worlds and censured
those who talked as if there were but one. Another,
not a man of peace, opined that war was the father
of the universe.

As for the gods, why speak of them at all, seeing
that to some a number was god, while others swore
by geese and dogs and plane-trees? Moreover,
some banished all the rest of the gods and assigned
the governance of the universe to one only, so that
it made me a little disgusted to hear that gods were
so scarce. Others, however, lavishly declared them

 

to be many and drew a distinction between them,
calling one a first god and ascribing to others second
and third rank in divinity. Furthermore, some
thought that the godhead was without form and
substance, while others defined it as body. Then
too they did not all think that the gods exercise
providence in our affairs; there were some who
relieved them of every bit of responsibility as we are
accustomed to relieve old men of public duties;
indeed, the part that they give them to play is just
like that of supers in comedy. A few went beyond
all this and did not even believe that there were any
gods at all, but left the world to wag on unruled and
ungoverned.

When I heard all this, the result was that I did not
venture to disbelieve “high-thundering” gentlemen
with goodly beards, and yet did not know where to
turn in order to find a point of doctrine that was unassailable and not in any way subject to refutation
by someone else. So I went through just what
Homer speaks of; again and again I was fain to
believe one of them,

 “but other counsel drew me
back. 
 Od. 9, 302. 


At my wit’s end in view of all this, I despaired of
hearing any truth about these matters on earth and
thought that the only way out of my whole dilemma
would be to get wings somehow and go up to
Heaven. The wish was father to the thought, of
course, but the story-teller Aesop had something to
do with it also, for he makes Heaven accessible to
eagles and beetles and now and then even to camels.


 

Well, that I myself could ever grow wings was not in
any way possible, I thought; butif L put on the wings
of a vulture or an eagle (for no others would be
large enough to uphold the weight of a man’s body),
perhaps my attempt would succeed. So catching my
birds, I carefully cut of the right wing of the eagle
and the left wing of the vulture, tied them tightly
together, fitted them to my shoulders with stout
straps and made grips for my hands at the ends of
the primary feathers. Then I first tried myself by
jumping up and down, working my arms and doing
as geese do—lifting myself along the ground and
running on tiptoe as I flew. When the thing began
to work well for me, I went in for the experiment
with greater boldness.



Going up to the acropolis, I
let myself drop down the cliff right into the theatre.

Since I flew down without mischance, I began to
aspire high and used to take wing from Parnes or
Hymettus, flying to Geraneia and from there up to
Acrocorinthus and then over Pholoe and Erymanthus
clear to Taygetus.
Now that I had thoroughly practised my experiment and had become an adept and a lofty soarer,
I no longer had fledgling aspirations but ascended
Olympus, provisioned myself as lightly as I could
and this time made straight for Heaven. At first
I was dizzied by the height, but afterwards I stood
even that without discomfort. But when I had
left the clouds far below and had got close to
the moon, I felt myself getting tired, especially in

 

the left wing, the vulture’s. Flying up, therefore,
and perching on the moon, I rested myself, looking
down on the earth from on high and like Homer’s
Zeus, now observing the land of the horse-loving
Thracians, now the land of the Mysians, and
presently, if I liked, Greece, Persia and India; and
from all this I got my fill of kaleidoscopic pleasure.
 
 FRIEND 
Then do tell me about it, Menippus, so that I
may not miss a single detail of the trip, but may even
know whatever you may have found out incidentally.
I assure you, I am looking forward to hearing a good
deal about the shape of the earth and about
everything upon it as it looked to you, viewing it all
from above.
 
 MENIPPUS 
You are right in your assumption, my friend, so
mount up to the moon in fancy as best you can and
share my trip and my view of the whole scheme of
things on earth.

In the first place, imagine that the
earth you see is very small, far less than the moon, [
mean; so that when I suddenly peered down I was
long uncertain where the big mountains and the
great sea were, and if I had not spied the Colossus of
Rhodes and the lighthouse on Pharos, I vow I
shouldn’t have known the earth at all. But as it
was, the fact that they were high and prominent
and that the ocean glinted in the sun showed me
that what I saw was the earth. But as soon as I
had concentrated my gaze fixedly, the life of man

 

in its entirety disclosed itself to me, and not only
the nations and cities but the people themselves
as clear as could be, the traders, the soldiers, the
farmers, the litigants, the women, the animals and,
in a word, all the life that the good green earth
supports. 
 FRIEND 
What you say is completely beyond belief and
self-contradictory, for you told me just now that you
had to look for the earth because it was diminished
by the intervening distance, and that if the Colossus
hadn’t given you your bearings, perhaps you would
have thought you were looking at something else.
How is it, then, that you have suddenly turned into a
Lynceus and can make out everything on earth—
the men, the animals and very nearly the nests of
the mosquitoes ?

MENIPPUS 
Thanks for reminding me; somehow or other I
neglected to say what I certainly should have said.
When I recognised the earth by sight, but was
unable to distinguish anything else on account of the
height, because my vision did not carry so far, the
thing annoyed me excessively and put me in a great
quandary. I was downcast and almost in tears when
the philosopher Empedocles came and stood behind
me, looking like a cinder, as he was covered with
ashes and all burned up. On catching sight of him
I wasa bit startled, to tell the truth, and thought I
beheld a lunar spirit ; but he said “Don’t be alarmed,
Menippus;


 No god am I: why liken me to them? 
 Od. 16, 187. 



 

I am the natural philosopher Empedocles, at your
service. You see, when I threw myself head-first
into the crater, the smoke snatched me out of
Aetna and brought me up here, and now I dwell in
the moon, although I walk the air a great deal, and
I live on dew. So I have come to get you out of
your present quandary ; for it annoys and torments
you, I take it, that you cannot clearly see everything
on earth.” “Thank you very much, Empedocles,”
said I; “you are most kind, and as soon as I fly
down to Greece again I will remember to pour you a
drink-offering in the chimney and on the first: of
every month to open my mouth at the moon three
times and make a prayer.” “Great Endymion !”
said he, “I didn’t come here for pay; my heart was
touched a bit when I saw you sorrowful. Do you
know what to do in order to become sharp-sighted ?”

“No,” said I, “unless you are going to take the mist
from my eyes somehow. At present my sight seems
to be uncommonly blurred.” “Why,” said he, “you
won’t need my services at all, for you yourself have
brought the power of sharp sight with you from
the earth.” “What is it, then, for I don’t know?” I
said. “Don’t you know,” said he, “that you are
wearing the right wing of an cagle?” “Of course,”
said I, “but what is the connection between wings
and eyes?” “This,” said he; “the eagle so far
surpasses all the other creatures in strength of sight
that he alone can look square at the sun, and the
mark of the genuine royal cagle is that he can face
its rays without winking an eye.” “So they say,” I

 

replied, “and I am sorry now that when I came up
here I did not take out my own eyes and put in those
of the eagle. As things are, I have come in a_halffinished condition and with an equipment which is
not fully royal; in fact, I am like the bastard, disowned eaglets they tell about.” “Why,” said he,
“it is in your power this minute to have one eye
royal, for if you choose to stand up a moment, hold
the vulture’s wing still, and flap only the other one,
you will become sharp-sighted in the right eye to
match the wing; the other eye cannot possibly help
being duller, as it is on the inferior side.” It will
satisfy me,” said I, “if only the right one has the
sight of an eagle; it would do just as well, for I am
sure I have often seen carpenters getting on better
with only one eye when they were trimming off
timbers to the straight-edge.”


This said, I set about doing as Empedocles advised,
while he receded little by little and gradually dissolved into smoke.

No sooner had I flapped the
wing than a great light broke upon me and all that
was formerly invisible was revealed. Bending down
toward earth, I clearly saw the cities, the people and
all that they* were doing, not only abroad but at
home, when they thought they were unobserved. I
saw Ptolemy lying with his sister, Lysimachus’ son
conspiring against his father, Seleucus’ son Antiochus
flirting surreptitiously with his stepmother, Alexander
of ‘Thessaly getting killed by his wife, Antigonus
committing adultery with the wife of his son, and

 

the son of Attalus pouring out the poison for him.
In another quarter I saw Arsaces killing the woman,
the eunuch Arbaces drawing his sword on Arsaces,
and Spatinus the Mede in the hands of the guards,
being dragged out of the dining-room by the leg
after having had his head broken with a golden
cup. Similar things were to be seen going on in
Libya and among the Thracians and Scythians in the
palaces of kings—men committing adultery, murdering, conspiring, plundering, forswearing, fearing
and falling victims to the treason of their closest kin.

Although the doings of the kings afforded me such
rare amusement, those of the common people were
far more ridiculous, for I could see them too—
Hermodorus the Epicurean perjuring himself for a
thousand drachmas, the Stoie Agathocles going to
law with his disciple about a fee, the orator Clinias
stealing a cup out of the Temple of Asclepius and the
Cynic Herophilus asleep in the brothel. Why mention
the rest of them—the burglars, the bribe-takers, the
money-lenders, the beggars? In brief, it was a motley
and manifold spectacle.
 
 FRIEND 
Really, you might as well tell about that too,
Menippus, for it scems to have given you unusual
pleasure.
 
 MENIPPUS 
To tell it all from first to last, my friend, would be

 

impossible in such a case, where even to see it all
was hard work. However, the principal features
were like what Homer says was on the shield. In
one place there were banquets and weddings, elsewhere there were sessions of court and assemblics ;
in a different direction a man was offering sacrifice,
and close at hand another was mourning a death.
Whenever I looked at the country of the Getae I
saw them fighting ; whenever I transferred my gaze to
the Seythians, they could be seen roving about on their
wagons: and when I turned my eyes aside slightly,
I beheld the Egyptians working the land. The Phoenicians were on trading-ventures, the Cilicians were
engaged in piracy, the Spartans were whipping themselves and the Athenians were attending court.

As
all these things were going on at the same time, you
can imagine what a hodge-podge it looked. It is as
if one should put on the stage a company of singers,
or I should say a number of companies, and then
should order each singer to abandon harmony and
sing a tune of his own; with cach one full of
emulation and carrying his own tune and striving to
outdo his neighbour in loudness of voice, what, in the
name of Heaven, do you suppose the song would be
like ?
 
 FRIEND 
Utterly ridiculous, Menippus, and all confused.
 
 MENIPPUS 
Well, my friend, such is the part that all carth’s
singers play, and such is the discord that makes

 

up the life of men. Not only do they sing different
tunes, but they are unlike in costume and move at
cross-purposes in the dance and agree in nothing
until the manager drives each of them off the stage,
saying that he has no further use for him. After
that, “however, they are all quiet alike, no longer
singing that unrhythmical medley of theirs. But
there in the play-house itself, full of variety and
shifting spectacles, everything that took place was
truly laughable.

I was especially inclined to laugh at the people who
quarrelled about boundary-lines, and at those who
plumed themselves on working the plain of Sicyon
or possessing the district of Oenoe in Marathon or
owning a thousand acres in Acharnae. As a matter
of fact, since the whole of Greece as it looked to
me then from on high was no bigger than four
fingers, on that scale surely Attica was infinitesimal.
I thought, therefore, how little there was for our
friends the rich to be proud of ; for it seemed to me
that the widest-acred of them all had but a single
Epicurean atom under cultivation. And when I
looked toward the Peloponnese and caught sight
of Cynuria, I noted what a tiny region, no bigger in
any way than an Egyptian bean, had caused so many
Argives and Spartans to fall in a single day. Again,
if T saw any man pluming himself on gold because
he had eight rings and four cups, I laughed heartily
at him too, for the whole of Pangacum, mines and
all, was the size of a grain of millet.

FRIEND 
You lucky Menippus, what a surprising spectacle !

 

But the cities and the men—for Heaven’s sake, how
did they look from on high ?
 
 MENIPPUS 
I suppose you have often seen a swarm of ants,
in which some are huddling together about the
mouth of the hole and transacting affairs of state in
public, some are going out and others are coming
back again to the city; one is carrying out the dung,
and another has caught up the skin of a bean or half
a grain of wheat somewhere and is running off with
it; and no doubt there are among them, in due proportion to the habits of ants, builders, politicians,
aldermen, musicians, and philosophers. But however that may be, the cities with their population
resembled nothing so much as ant-hills. If you think
it is belittling to compare men with the institutions
of ants, look up the ancient fables of the Thessalians
and you will find that the Myrmidons, the most
warlike of races, turned from ants into men.
Well, when I had looked and laughed at everything to my heart’s content, I shook myself and flew
upward,

 Unto the palace of Zeus, to the home of the other
immortals. 
 Iliad1, 222.

Before I had gone a furlong upward, the moon spoke
with a voice like a woman’s and said: “Menippus,
Pll thank you kindly to do me a service with Zeus.”
"Tell me what it is,’ said I, “it will be no trouble
at all, unless you want me to carry something.”
"Take a simple message and a request from me to


 

Zeus. I am tired at last, Menippus, of hearing
quantities of dreadful abuse from the philosophers,
who have nothing else to do but to bother about me,
what I am, how big I am, and why I become semicircular, or crescent-shaped. Some of them say I am
inhabited, others that I hang over the sea like a
mirror, and others ascribe to me—oh, anything that
each man’s fancy prompts. Lately they even say
that my very light is stolen and illegitimate, coming
from the sun up above, and they never weary of
wanting to entangle and embroil me with him,
although he is my brother; for they were not
satisfied with saying that Helius himself was a stone,
and a glowing mass of molten metal.

“But am I not aware of all the shameful,
abominable deeds they do at night, they who by
day are dour-visaged, resolute of cye, majestic of
mien and the cynosure of the general public? Yet
although I see all this, I keep quiet about it, for
I do not think it decent to expose and illumine
those nocturnal pastimes of theirs and their life
behind the scenes. On the contrary, if I see one
of them committing adultery or thieving or making
bold to do anything else that best befits the night,
I draw my garment of cloud together and _ veil
my face at once, in order that I may not let the
common people see old men bringing discredit on
their long beards and on virtue. But they for their
part never desist from picking me to pieces in talk
and _ insulting me in every way, so that I vow by
Night, I have often thought of moving as far away as
possible to a place where I might escape their
meddling tongues.

 

"So be sure to report all this to Zeus and to add,
too, that I cannot remain in my place unless he
destroys the .natural philosophers, muzzles the
logicians, razes the Porch, burns down the Academy,
and stops the lectures in the Walks; for only then
can I get a rest and cease to be surveyed by them
every day.”

“Very well,” said I, and therewith I pressed on
upwards along the road to Heaven,

 ‘Whence there was naught to be seen of the labours
of men or of oxen ; 
 Od. 10, 98. 


for in a little while even the moon seemed small to me,
and the earth had at last disappeared from my view.
Taking the sun on my right and flying past the
stars, on the third day out I drew near to Heaven.
At first I made up my mind to go straight in without
more ado, for I thought I should easily escape
observation, as I was half eagle and I knew that the
eagle was on intimate terms with Zeus from of old;
but afterwards I concluded that they would very
soon find me out because the other wing that I wore
was a vulture’s. Thinking it best, anyhow, not to
take any unnecessary chances, I went up and knocked
at the door. Hermes answered my knock, inquired
my name, and went off in haste to tell Zeus. In a
little while I was admitted in great fear and
trembling, and found them all sitting together, not
without apprehension themselves; for my visit,
being so unprecedented, had put them in a quiet
flutter, and they almost expected the whole human
race to arrive at any moment, provided with wings
like maine.

Zeus, however, looked at me with a


 

fierce, Titanic stare and said in a very terrible
voice:

 What is your name, sir, whence do you come, and
where is your city and hearth-stone ? 
 The line occurs frequently in the Odyssey, e.g. 1, 170. 


When I heard this, I nearly dropped dead of
fright, but stood my ground all the same, though
my jaw was hanging and I was thunderstruck by
the loudness of his voice. But in time I pulled
myself together and told him the whole story
clearly, starting at the very beginning—how I
wanted to learn about the heavenly bodies, how I
went to the philosophers, how I heard them contradicting each other, how I got tired of being
pulled this way and that by their arguments, and
then about my idea and the wings and all the rest of
it till my arrival in Heaven ; and at the end I added
the message of the moon. Smiling and unbending
a little, Zeus remarked: “What can one say to Otus
and Ephialtes when even a Menippus has the
hardihood to come up to Heaven? However, we
invite you to be our guest for to-day, and to-morrow,
after we have taken action on the matters about
which you have come, we shall send you away.”
With that he arose and walked toward the best
place in Heaven for hearing, as it was time to sit and
listen to the prayers.

As he walked along he asked me about things on
earth, first the usual questions, how much wheat now
costs in Greece, whether the last winter hit us hard
and whether the crops needed more rain. Then he


 

inquired whether any of the descendants of Phidias
were still left, why the Athenians had omitted the
Diasia for so many years, whether they had any idea
of finishing the Olympieion for him and whether the
men who robbed his temple in Dodona had been
arrested. 
 
When I had answered these questions, he said:

 “Tell me, Menippus, what opinion do men hold
about me? 


“Tell me, Menippus, what opinion do men hold
about me?” “What opinion should they hold, sir,”
said I, “except the highest possible one, that you
are king of all the gods?” “You are fond of your
joke,” said he, “but I am thoroughly acquainted
with their craze for novelty even without your telling
me. There was once a time when they looked
upon me as a prophet and a healer, and I was all
in all ;
“Yea, full of Zeus were all the streets
And all the marts of men.’
At that time Dodona and Pisa were rich and highly
regarded by all, and I could not even see for the
smoke of the sacrifices. But since Apollo founded
his oracle at Delphi and Asclepius his hospital in
Pergamos and the temple of Bendis arose in Thrace
and the temple of Anubis in Egypt and the temple
of Artemis in Ephesus, these are the places where
they all run and celebrate feast-days and bring hecatombs, and offer up ingots of gold, while I, they
think, being past my prime, am sufficiently honoured

 

if they sacrifice to me once every four whole years
at Olympia. Consequently, you can see for yourself
that my altars are more frigid than the Laws of
Plato or the Syllogisms of Chrysippus.”

Pursuing such topics, we came to the place where
he had to sit and hear the prayers. There was a
row of openings like mouths of wells, with covers
on them, and beside each stood a golden throne.
Sitting down by the first one, Zeus took off the cover
and gave his attention to the people who were
praying. The prayers came from all parts of the
world and were of all sorts and kinds, for I myself
bent over the orifice and listened to them along
with him. They went like this; “O Zeus, may I
succeed in becoming king!” “O Zeus, make my
onions and my garlic grow!” “QO ye gods, let my
father die quickly!”; and now and then one or
another would say: “O that I may inherit my wife’s
property!” “QO that I may be undetected in my
plot against my brother!” “May I succeed in
winning my suit!” “Let me win the wreath at the
Olympic games!”” Among seafaring men, one was
praying for the north wind to blow, another for the
south wind; and the farmers were praying for rain
while the washermen were praying for sunshine.
Zeus listened and weighed each prayer carefully,
but did not promise everything ;

 This by the Father was granted and that was denied
them. 
 Iliad16, 250. 


You see, he let the just prayers come up through the
orifice and then took them and filed them away at
his right; but he sent the impious ones back un-



 

granted, blowing them downward so that they might
not even come near Heaven. In the case of one
petition I observed that he was really in a dilemma :
when two men made contrary prayers and promised
equal sacrifices, he didn’t know which one of them
to give assent to; so that he was in the same plight
as the Academicians and could not make any aflirmation at all, but suspended judgement for a while and
thought it over, like Pyrrho.

When he had given sufficient consideration to the
prayers, he moved to the next throne and the second
opening, leaned down and devoted himself to covenants and people making oaths. After considering
these and annihilating Hermodorus the Epicurean,
he changed his seat to the next throne to give his
attention to omens derived from sounds and sayings
and the flight of birds. Then he moved from there
to the sacrifice-opening, through which the smoke
came up and told Zeus the name of each man who
was sacrificing. On leaving the openings, he gave
orders to the winds and the weather, telling them
what to do: “Let there be rain to-day in Scythia,
lightning in Libya, snow in Greece. North Wind,
blow in Lydia. South Wind, take a day off. Let
the West Wind raise a storm on the Adriatic, and
let about a thousand bushels of hail be sprinkled over
Cappadocia.”

By this time he had pretty well settled everything,
and we went away to the dining-hall, as it was time
for dinner. Hermes took me in charge and gave me
a place beside Pan and the Corybantes and Attis and
Sabazius, those alien gods of doubtful status.
Demeter gave me bread, Dionysus wine, Heracles

 

meat, Aphrodite perfume and Poseidon sprats. But
I also had surreptitious tastes of the ambrosia and
the nectar, for Ganymede, bless his heart, had so
much of human kindness about him that whenever
he saw Zeus looking another way he would hastily
pour me out a mouthful or two of the nectar. But
as Homer says somewhere or other, —having seen
what was there, I suppose, just like me—the gods
themselves neither cat bread nor drink ruddy wine
but have ambrosia sect before them and get drunk on
nectar; and they are especially fond of dining on
the smoke from the sacrifices, which comes up to
them all savoury, and on the blood of the victims
that is shed about the altars when people sacrifice.
During dinner - Apollo played the lute, Silenus
danced the can-can and the Muses got up and sang
us something from Hesiod’s Theogony and the first
song in the Hymns of Pindar. When we had had
enough we composed ourselves for the night without
any ceremony, being pretty well soused.

All the others, the gods and the warriors chariot-owning, 
 Slept until morning, pus I was unbound by the
fetters of slumber, 
 Iliad2, 1-2. 


for I was thinking about many things, above all how
Apollo had not grown a beard in all this while, and
how it gets to be night in Heaven with Helius
always there and sharing the feast.
Well, as I say, I slept but little that night, and in
the early morning Zeus got up and ordered procla-:


 

mation for an assembly to be made.

When everybody was there, he began to speak :
"The reason for calling you together is supplied,
of course, by our visitor here of yesterday, but I
have long wanted to confer with you about the
philosophers, and so, being stirred to action by the
moon in particular and the criticisms that she makes,
I have decided not to put off the discussion any
longer. 
 
“There is a class of men which made its
appearance in the world not long ago, lazy, disputatious, vainglorious, quick-tempered, gluttonous,
doltish, addle-pated, full of effrontery and to age
the language of Homer, ‘a uscless load to the soil. 
Well, these people, dividing themselves into schol
and inventing various word-mazes, have called themselves Stoics, Academics, Epicurcans, Peripatetics
and other things much more laughable than these.
Then, cloaking themselves i in the high- sounding name
of Virtue, elevating their eyebrows, wrinkling up
their foreheads and letting their beards grow long,
they go about hiding loathsome habits under a
false garb, very like actors in tragedy ; for if you
take away from the latter their masks and_ their
gold-embroidered robes, nothing is left but a
comical little creature hired for the show at seven
drachmas.

“But although that is what they are, they look
with scorn on all mankind and they tell absurd
stories about the gods; collecting lads who are easy
to hoodwink, they rant about their far-famed
Virtue’ and teach them their insoluble fallacies ;
and in the presence of their disciples they always

 

sing the praise of restraint and) temperance and
self-suflicieney and spit at wealth and pleasure,
but when they are all by themselves, how can
one describe how much they cat, how much they
indulge their passions and how they lick the filth
off pennies ?
“Worst of all, though they themselves do no goéd
either in public or in private life but are uscless and
superfluous,

 Neither in war nor in council of any account, 
 Iliad2, 202. 


nevertheless they accuse everyone clse; they amass
biting phrases and school themselves in novel terms
of abuse, and then they censure and reproach their
fellow-men ; and whoever of them is the most noisy
and impudent and reckless in calling names is held
to be the champion.

But if you were to ask the
very man who is straining his lungs and bawling and
accusing everybody else: ‘How about yourself?
What do you really do, and what in Heaven’s name
do you contribute’ to the world?’ he would say, if
he were willing to say what was right and true: ¢1
hold it unnecessary to be a merchant or a farmer or a
soldier or to follow'y trade; I shout, go dirty, take
cold baths, walk abeut barefoot in winter, wear a
filthy mantle and like Momus carp at everything the
others do. If some rich man or other has made an
extravagant outlay on a dinner or keeps a mistress, I
make it my affair and get hot about it; but if one of


 

my friends or associates is ill abed and needs relief
and attendance, I ignore it.’ 
 
“That is what these whelps are like, gods.

Moreover, some of them who call themselves
Epicureans are very insolent fellows indeed and
attack us immoderately, saying not only that the
gods do not direct human affairs, -but that they pay
no attention at all to what goes on. So it is high
time you were bethinking yourselves that if they
ever are able to persuade the world, you will go
uncommonly hungry; for who would continue to
sacrifice to you if he expected to gain nothing by it ? 
 
“As for what the moon finds fault with, you all
heard the stranger tell about that yesterday. In
view of all this, take such action as may be most advantageous to men and most salutary for ourselves.”

When Zeus had finished this speech the assembly
fell into a commotion, and at once they all began to
shout: “Blast them,” “Burn them,” “Annihilate
them”; “To the pit,” “To Tartarus,” “To the
Giants.’ Calling for silence once more, Zeus said:
“It shall be as you will; they shall be annihilated,
and their logic with them. However, just at
present it is not in order to punish anyone, for it is
the festival-season, as you know, during the next
four months, and I have already sent about to
announce the truce of God. Next year, therefore,
at the opening of spring the wretches shall die
a wretched death by the horrid thunderbolt.”

 So spake Cronus his son, and he bent black brows to
confirm it ! 
 Iliad1, 528.

“As to Menippus here," he said, “this is my


 

decision: after his wings have been taken away
from him so that he may never come again, let him be
carried down to earth to-day by Hermes.” With this
he dismissed the meeting, whereupon Cyllenius
(Hermes) picked me up by the right ear and took me
down to the Potters’ Quarter yesterday evening.
You have heard it all, my friend, all the news
from Heaven. Now I am going off to carry the
glad tidings to the philosophers who pace about in
the Porch.