INTRODUCTION 
 Plutarch's account of the dinner of the seven wise men is a literary tour de
					force. Both Plato and Xenophon had composed similar accounts of such
					gatherings in their own time, and Plutarch himself has recorded in detail in
					his Symposiacs (or TableTalks) much of the conversation which was heard at
					such gatherings in his day. This is comparatively an easy task, but in the
					account of the dinner of the seven wise men Plutarch, who lived several
					centuries after Plato and Xenophon, deliberately set himself to compose an
					account of a meeting of people who lived a couple of centuries before Plato
					and Xenophon—at the dawn, almost, of authentic Greek history.
					There was a tradition, recorded by Plato in the Protagoras (p. 343 a) and by
					other writers, that the seven wise men had met at Delphi in connexion with
					the dedication of the two famous inscriptions on the temple of Apollo there,
					and there was an added tradition that they had later been entertained by
					Periander at Corinth. Besides this, many sayings of the wise men were
					traditionally current. With this material at hand, Plutarch composed his
					imaginative account of the dinner, adding other characters such as
					Neiloxenus and Aesop, and giving it a more intimate touch by introducing the
					feminine element in the persons of Melissa and Eumetis
					; and at the end, for good measure, he added an elaboration of the familiar
					story of Arion's rescue by dolphins, already well known from the account of
					Herodotus (i. 24) and of other writers; and this is capped by a few more
					dolphins. 
 The title ( Συμπόσιον τῶν ἐπτὰ σοφῶν )
					stands as No. 110 in the catalogue of Lamprias, and the essay is
					occasionally quoted or referred to by later Greek writers. 
 Plutarch names, as the seven wise men, Thales, Bias, Pittacus, Solon, Chilon,
					Cleobulus, and Anacharsis. Plato (Protagoras, 343 a) puts Myson in place of
					Anacharsis, and in other lists Periander is found in his stead. Pherecydes,
					Epimenides, and Peisistratus are the other candidates for a place in the
					list.

It seems fairly certain, Nicarchus, that the lapse of time will bring about
					much obscurity and complete uncertainty regarding actual events, if at the
					present time, in the case of events so fresh and recent, false accounts that
					have been concocted obtain credence. For, in the first place, the dinner was
					not a dinner of the Seven alone, as you and your friends have been told, but
					of more than twice that number, including myself; for I was on intimate
					terms with Periander by virtue of my profession, and I was also the host of
					Thales, for he stayed at my house by command of Periander. In the second
					place, your informant, whoever he was, did not report the conversation
					correctly; apparently he was not one of those at the dinner. However, since
					there is nothing that demands my attention just now, and old age is too
					untrustworthy to warrant postponing the narration, I will begin at the
					beginning, and tell you, without any omissions, the story which you all seem
					eager to hear.

Periander had arranged for the entertainment, not in the city but in the
					dining-hall in the vicinity of Lechaeum, close by the shrine of Aphrodite,
					in whose honour the sacrifice was offered that day. For Periander, ever
					since his mother's love-affair which xv.2.p.351"/> had led to her
					self-destruction, had offered no sacrifice to Aphrodite, but now, for the
					first time, owing to certain dreams of Melissa's, he had set about honouring
					and conciliating the goddess. 
 For each of the invited guests a carriage and pair, fashionably caparisoned,
					was brought to the door; for it was summer-time, and the whole length of
					the street even to the water's edge was one mass of dust and confusion by
					reason of the great crowd of vehicles and people. Thales, however, when he
					saw the equipage at the door, smiled and dismissed it. And so we set out on
					foot, leaving the road and going through the fields in a leisurely fashion,
					and with us two was Neiloxenus of Naucratis, an able man, who had been on
					terms of intimacy with Solon and Thales and their group in Egypt. He, as it
					happened, had been sent a second time on a mission to Bias, the reason for
					which he did not know, save only that he suspected that he was bringing for
					Bias a second problem sealed up in a packet. His instructions were, that if
					Bias should give up trying to solve it, he should show the packet to the
					wisest among the Greeks. 
 
 It is a piece of good fortune for me, said Neiloxenus, 
					to have found you all together here, and, as you see, I am bringing the
					packet with me to the dinner ; and at the same time he showed
					it to us. 
 Thales began to laugh, and said, If it is anything bad, go to Priene 
					again! For Bias will have a solution for this, just as he had his own
					solution of the first problem. 
				 
 
 What, said I, was the first problem? 
				 
 
 The king, said he, sent to Bias an animal for sacrifice, with instructions to take out and send
					back to him the worst and best portion of the meat. And our friend's
					neat and clever solution was, to take out the tongue and send it to
					him, with the result that he is now manifestly in high repute and
					esteem. 
				 
 
 Not for this alone, said Neiloxenus, but he does not
					try to avoid, as the rest of you do, being a friend of kings and being
					called such. In your case, for instance, the king finds much to admire
					in you, and in particular he was immensely pleased with your method of
					measuring the pyramid, because, without making any ado or asking for any
					instrument, you simply set your walking-stick upright at the edge of the
					shadow which the pyramid cast, and, two triangles being formed by the
					intercepting of the sun's rays, you demonstrated that the height of the
					pyramid bore the same relation to the length of the stick as the one
					shadow to the other. But, as I said, you have been unjustly accused of
					having an animosity against kings, and certain offensive pronouncements
					of yours regarding despots have been reported to him. For example, he
					was told that, when you were asked by Molpagoras the Ionian what was the
					most paradoxical thing you had ever seen, you replied, A despot that
					lived to be old. And again he was told that on a certain convivial
					occasion there was a discussion about animals, and you maintained that
					of the wild animals the worst was the despot, and of the tame the
					flatterer. Now kings, although they would make out that they are
					altogether different from despots, do not take kindly to such
					remarks. 
				 
 
 But the fact is, said Thales, that Pittacus is
					responsible for that statement, which was once made in jest with
					reference to Myrsilus. But, as for myself, I should
					be amazed to see, he continued, not a despot but a pilot
						that lived to be old. However, so far as concerns transferring this from
						the one to the other, my feeling is exactly that of the young man who
						threw a stone at his dog, but hit his stepmother, whereupon he
						exclaimed, Not so bad after all! This is the reason why I regarded
						Solon as very wise in refusing to accept the position of despot. And as
						for your friend Pittacus, if he had never addressed himself to the task
						of ruling single-handed, he would not have said that it is hard to be
						good. But Periander, apparently, in spite of his being afflicted with
						despotism as with an inherited disease, is making fair progress towards
						recovery by keeping wholesome company—at least up to the
						present time—and by bringing about conferences with men of
						sense, and by refusing to entertain the suggestions offered by my
						fellow-citizen Thrasybulus about lopping off the topmost. Indeed, a
						despot who desires to rule slaves rather than men is not unlike a farmer
						who is willing to gather in a harvest of darnel and rest-harrow rather
						than of wheat and barley. For the exercise of dominion possesses one
						advantage to set against its many disadvantages, and this is the honour
						and glory of it, if rulers rule over good men by being better than they,
						and are thought to surpass their subjects in greatness. But rulers that
						are content with safety without honour ought to rule over a lot of
						sheep, horses, and cattle, and not over men. But enough of this, 
					he continued, for our visitor here has precipitated us into a
						conversation that is quite inappropriate, since 
						 he has not been careful to bring up topics and
						questions suitable for persons on their way to dinner. Do you not
						honestly believe that, as some preparation is necessary on the part of
						the man who is to be host, there should also be some preparation on the
						part of him who is to be a guest at dinner? People in Sybaris, as it
						appears, have their invitations to women presented a year in advance so
						as to afford them plenty of time to provide themselves with clothes and
						jewellery to wear when they come to dinner ; but I am of the opinion
						that the genuine preparation on the part of the man who is to be the
						right kind of guest at dinner requires even a longer time, inasmuch as
						it is more difficult to discover the fitting adornment for character
						than the superfluous and useless adornment for the body. In fact, the
						man of sense who comes to dinner does not betake himself there just to
						fill himself up as though he were a sort of pot, but to take some part,
						be it serious or humorous, and to listen and to talk regarding this or
						that topic as the occasion suggests it to the company, if their
						association together is to be pleasant. Now an unsavoury dish can be
						declined, and, if the wine be poor, one may find refuge with the
						water-sprites; but a guest at dinner who gives the others a headache,
						and is churlish and uncivil, ruins and spoils the enjoyment of any wines
						and viands or of any girl's music; nor is there any ready means by
						which one can spew out this sort of unsavouriness, but with some persons
						their mutual dislike lasts for their entire lifetime—stale
						dregs, as it were, of some insult or fit of temper which was called into
						being over wine. Wherefore Chilon showed most excellent judgement when
						he received his invitation yesterday, in not
						agreeing to come until he had learned the name of every person invited.
						For he said that men must put up with an inconsiderate companion on
						shipboard or under the same tent, if necessity compels them to travel or
						to serve in the army, but that to trust to luck regarding the people one
						is to be associated with at table is not the mark of a man of sense. 
						Now the skeleton which in Egypt they are wont, with fair reason, to
						bring in and expose at their parties, urging the guests to remember that
						what it is now, they soon shall be, although it is an ungracious and
						unseasonable companion to be introduced at a merry-making, yet has a
						certain timeliness, even if it does not incline the guests to drinking
						and enjoyment, but rather to a mutual friendliness and affection, and if
						it urges upon them that life, which is short in point of time, should
						not be made long by evil conduct.

Engaging in such discourse as this along the way, we arrived at the house.
					Thales did not care to bathe, for we had already had a rub-down. So he
					visited and inspected the race-tracks, the trainingquarters of the athletes,
					and the beautifully kept park along the shore; not that he was ever greatly
					impressed by anything of the sort, but so that he should not seem to show
					disdain or contempt for Periander's ambitious designs. As for the other
					guests, each one, after enjoying a rub-down or a bath, was conducted by the
					servants to the diningroom through the open colonnade. 
 Anacharsis was seated in the colonnade, and in front of him stood a girl who
					was parting his hair with her hands. This girl ran to Thales in a most
					open-hearted way, whereupon he kissed her and said
					laughingly, Go on and make our visitor beautiful, so that we may not
						find him terrifying and savage in his looks, when he is, in reality,
						most civilized. 
				 
 When I inquired about the girl and asked who she was, he replied, 
					Have you not heard of the wise and far-famed Eumetis? Really, though,
					that is only her father's name for her, and most people call her
					Cleobulina after her father. 
				 
 
 I am sure, said Neiloxenus, that when you speak so
					highly of the maiden you must have reference to the cleverness and skill
					that she shows in her riddles; for it is a fact that some of her
					conundrums have even found their way to Egypt. 
				 
 
 No indeed, said Thales, for these she uses like dice as
					a means of occasional amusement, and risks an encounter with all comers.
					But she is also possessed of wonderful sense, a statesman's mind, and an
					amiable character, and she has influence with her father so that his
					government of the citizens has become milder and more popular. 
				 
 
 Yes, said Neiloxenus, that must be apparent to
					anybody who observes her simplicity and lack of affectation. But what is
					the reason for her loving attentions to Anacharsis? 
				 
 
 Because, replied Thales, he is a man of sound sense
					and great learning, and he has generously and readily imparted to her
					the system of diet and purging which the Scythians employ in treating
					their sick. And I venture to think that at this very moment, while she
					is bestowing this affectionate attention on the man, she is gaining some
					knowledge through further conversation with him. 
				 
 We were already near the dining-room when Alexidemus of
					Miletus met us. He was a son of the despot Thrasybulus, but born out of
					wedlock. He was coming out in a state of great agitation, angrily talking to
					himself, but saying nothing that was intelligible to us. When he saw Thales
					he recovered himself a little, stopped, and exclaimed, What an
						insult! To think that Periander should behave so toward us! Why, he
						simply would not hear of my going away when I was bent on going, but
						begged me to stay over for the dinner; and then when I came he assigned
						to me an ignominious place, setting Aeolians, and men from the islands,
						and what not, above Thrasybulus. For it is plain that in my person he
						wishes to offer insult to Thrasybulus, who delegated me to come, and to
						put him low down to show that he purposely ignores him. 
				 
 
 So then, said Thales, as the Egyptians say of the
					stars, when they gain or lose altitude in their courses, that they are
					growing better or worse than they were before, do you fear that the
					obscuration and degradation affecting you because of your place at table
					will be brought about in a similar way? And you will be contemptible
					when compared with the Spartan who in a chorus was put by the director
					in the very last place, whereupon he exclaimed, Good! You have found
					out how this may be made a place of honour. When we have taken our
					places, continued Thales, we ought not to try to
						discover who has been placed above us, but rather how we may be
						thoroughly agreeable to those placed with us, by trying at once to
						discover in them something that may serve to initiate and keep up
						friendship, and, better yet, by harbouring no discontent but an open
						satisfaction in being placed next to such persons as these. For, in every case, a man that objects to his place at table
						is objecting to his neighbour rather than to his host, and he makes
						himself hateful to both. 
				 
 
 All this, said Alexidemus, is merely talk that means
					nothing. As a matter of fact, I observe that all you wise men too make
					it your aim in life to have honour shown you ; and with that he
					passed by us and departed. 
 Thales, in answer to our look of astonishment at the man's extraordinary
					conduct, said, A crazy fellow, and uncouth by nature; as an
						instance, when he was still a boy, some especially fine perfume was
						brought to Thrasybulus, and this the youngster emptied into a big
						wine-cooler, and on top of it poured strong wine, and drank it off, thus
						creating enmity instead of friendship for Thrasybulus. 
				 
 Just then a servant made his way to us and said, Periander bids you,
					and Thales too, to take your friend here with you and inspect something
					which has just now been brought to him, to determine whether its birth
					is of no import whatever, or whether it is a sign and portent; at any
					rate, he himself seemed to be greatly agitated, feeling that it was a
					pollution and blot upon his solemn festival. With these words he
					conducted us to one of the rooms off the garden. Here a youth, a herdsman
					apparently, beardless as yet, and not bad-looking withal, unfolded a piece
					of leather, and showed us a newly-born creature which he asserted was the
					offspring of a mare. Its upper parts as far as the neck and arms were of
					human form, and the sound of its crying was just like that of newly-born
					infants, but the rest of its body was that of a horse. Neiloxenus merely
					exclaimed, God save us, and turned his face away; but Thales fixed his gaze upon the youth for a long
					time, and then, with a smile (for he was in the habit of joking with me
					about my profession), said, No doubt, Diocles, you are minded to set
						in operation your ritual of atonement, and to trouble the gods who
						deliver us from evil, since you must feel that something terrible and
						momentous has befallen? 
				 
 
 Why not? said I, since this thing is a sign of
					strife and discord, Thales, and I fear that it may go so far as to
					affect even marriage and offspring, because, even before we have made
					full atonement for the first fault that moved the goddess to wrath, she
					plainly shows us, as you see, that there is a second. 
				 
 To this Thales made no answer, but withdrew, laughing all the while.
					Periander met us at the door, and inquired about what we had seen;
					whereupon Thales left me and took his hand, saying, Whatever Diocles
						bids you do you will carry out at your own convenience, but my
						recommendation to you is that you should not employ such young men as
						keepers of horses, or else that you should provide wives for
						them. 
 
 
 It seemed to me that Periander, on hearing his words, was mightily pleased,
					for he burst out laughing and embraced Thales most affectionately. I
						think, Diocles, said Thales, that the sign has already
							had its fulfilment, for you see what a bad thing has happened to us in
							that Alexidemus would not dine with us!

When we had entered the dining-room, Thales, in a louder voice than usual,
					said, Where is the place at table to which the man objected?
					 And when its position was pointed out to him he made his way to it,
					and placed himself and us there, at the same time
					remarking, Why, I would have given money to share the same table
						with Ardalus. This Ardalus was from Troezene, a flute-player and
					a priest of the Ardalian Muses, whose worship his forefather, Ardalus of
					Troezene, had established. 
 
 Aesop too, as it happened, having been sent by Croesus only a short time
					before on a mission both to Periander and to the god at Delphi, was present
					at the dinner, seated on a low chair next to Solon, who occupied the place
					just above. Aesop said : A Lydian mule caught sight of his own
						image reflected in a river, and, suddenly struck with admiration at the
						beauty and great size of his body, tossed his mane and started to run
						like a horse, but then, recalling that his sire was an ass, he soon
						stopped his running, and gave up his pride and animation. 
				 
 Whereupon Chilon, dropping into Laconian dialect, remarked, It's slow
					ye are, and ye're running on like the mule. 
				 
 Just then Melissa came in and took her place on the couch next to Periander,
					but Eumetis sat during the dinner. Then Thales, addressing himself to me (my
					place was just above that of Bias), said, Diocles, why do you not
						tell Bias at once that our guest from Naucratis has again come to him
						with a king's problems, so that he may hear them stated while he is
						sober and circumspect? 
				 
 
 Hear that! said Bias; this man has been trying for a
					long time to terrify me with such adjurations; but I know that Dionysus,
					besides being clever in other ways, is called the solver by virtue
					of wisdom, so I have no fears that if I become 
					 filled with his spirit I shall compete with less
					courage. 
				 
 In such repartee as this did those men indulge while dining; but to me, as I
					was noticing that the dinner was plainer than usual, there came the thought
					that the entertainment and invitation of wise and good men involves no
					expense, but rather curtails expense, since it does away with over-elaborate
					viands and imported perfumes and sweetmeats and the serving of costly wines,
					all of which were in fairly free use every day with Periander in his royal
					position and wealth and circumstance. But on this occasion he tried to make
					an impression on the men by simplicity and restraint in expenditure. Nor was
					this limited to these other matters, but he also made his wife put aside and
					out of sight her usual elaborate attire, and present herself inexpensively
					and modestly attired.

After the tables had been cleared away, and garlands distributed by Melissa,
					and we had poured libations, and the flute-girl, after playing a brief
					accompaniment for our libations, had withdrawn, then Ardalus, addressing
					Anacharsis, inquired if there were flute-girls among the Scythians. 
 He answered on the spur of the moment, No, nor grape-vines
					either, 
				 
 When Ardalus again said, But the Scythians must have gods, he
					replied, Certainly, they have gods who understand the language of
						men; they are not like the Greeks, who, although they think they
						converse better than the Scythians, yet believe that the gods have more
						pleasure in listening to the sounds produced by bits of bone and
						wood. 
				 
 Thereupon Aesop said, I would have you know, my
					friend, that the modern flute-makers have given up the use of bones from
					fawns, and use bones from asses, asserting that the latter have a better
					sound. This fact underlies the riddle which Cleobulina made in regard
					to the Phrygian flute: Full on my ear with a horn-bearing shin did a
					dead donkey smite me. So we may well be astonished that the ass, which
					otherwise is most gross and unmelodious, yet provides us with a bone
					which is most fine and melodious. 
				 
 
 That, without question, said Neiloxenus, is the
					reason for the complaint which the people of Busiris make against us of
					Naucratis; for we are already using asses' bones for our flutes. But
					for them even to hear a trumpet is a sin, because they think it sounds
					like the bray of an ass; and you know, of course, that an ass is
					treated with contumely by the Egyptians on account of Typhon.

There was a pause in the conversation, and Periander, noticing that
					Neiloxenus wanted to begin his remarks, but was hesitating, said, I
						am inclined to commend both states and rulers that take up the business
						of strangers first and of their own citizens afterwards; and now it
						seems to me that we should for a few minutes put a check on our own
						words, which are, as it were, in their own land where they are well
						known, and grant audience, as in a legislative sitting, to the royal
						communication from Egypt, which our excellent friend Neiloxenus has
						
						 come to bring to Bias, and which Bias wishes to
						consider with all of us together. 
				 
 
 Indeed, said Bias, in what place or company would a
					man more readily take the risk, if he must, of answering such questions,
					especially since the king has given instructions to begin with me, and
					after that the matter is to come round to all the rest of you? 
				 
 As he said this Neiloxenus offered him the packet, but Bias bade him by all
					means to open it and read it aloud. The contents of the letter were to this
					effect: 
 Amasis, king of the Egyptians, to Bias, wisest of the Greeks. 
 
					 The king of the Ethiopians is engaged in a contest in wisdom against
						me. Repeatedly vanquished in all else, he has crowned his efforts by
						framing an extraordinary and awful demand, bidding me to drink up the
						ocean. My reward, if I find a solution, is to have many villages and
						cities of his, and if I do not, I am to withdraw from the towns lying
						about Elephantine. I beg therefore that you will consider the question,
						and send back Neiloxenus without delay. And whatever is right for your
						friends or citizens to receive from us shall meet with no let or
						hindrance on my part. 
				 
 After this had been read Bias did not wait long, but, after a few minutes of
					abstraction and a few words with Cleobulus, whose place was near his, he
					said, What is this, my friend from Naucratis? Do you mean to say
						that Amasis, who is king of so many people and possessed of such an
						excellent great country, will be willing, for the consideration of some
						insignificant and miserable villages, to drink up the ocean? 
					 
				 
 Neiloxenus answered with a laugh, Assume that he is willing, and
					consider what is possible for him to do. 
				 
 
 Well, then, said Bias, let him tell the Ethiopian to
					stop the rivers which are now emptying into the ocean depths, while he
					himself is engaged in drinking up the ocean that now is; for this is the
					ocean with which the demand is concerned, and not the one which is to
					be. 
				 
 As soon as Bias had said these words, Neiloxenus, for very joy, hastened to
					embrace and kiss him. The rest of the company also commended the answer, and
					expressed their satisfaction with it, and then Chilon said with a laugh,
					 My friend, before the ocean disappears entirely in consequence
						of being drunk up, I beg that you sail back to your home in Naucratis
						and take word to Amasis not to be trying to find out how to make way
						with so much bitter brine, but rather how to render his government
						potable and sweet to his subjects; for in these matters Bias is most
						adept and a most competent instructor, and if Amasis will only learn
						them from him, he will have no further need of his golden foot-tub to
						impress the Egyptians, but they will all show regard and affection for
						him if he is good, even though he be shown to be in his birth ten
						thousand times more lowly than at present. 
				 
 
 Yes, indeed, said Periander, it surely is right and
					proper that we all contribute an offering of this sort to the king, 
					 each man in his turn, as Homer has said. For to him these extra items
					would be more valuable than the burden of his mission, and as profitable
					for ourselves as anything could be.

Chilon thereupon said that it was only right that Solon
					should take the lead in speaking on this subject, not merely because he was
					most advanced in years and was occupying the place of honour, but because he
					held the greatest and most perfect position as a ruler by getting the
					Athenians to accept his laws. Thereupon Neiloxenus quietly remarked to me,
					 It is certain, Diocles, that a good many things come to be
						believed quite contrary to fact, and most people take delight in
						fabricating out of their own minds unwarranted tales about wise men, and
						in readily accepting such tales from others. Such, for instance, was the
						report, which was brought to us in Egypt, in regard to Chilon, to the
						effect that he had broken off his friendship and his hospitable
						relations with Solon because Solon asserted that laws are subject to
						revision. 
 
 
 
 The story is ridiculous, said I; for in such case
					Chilon ought first to renounce Lycurgus and all his laws, for Lycurgus
					revised completely the Spartan constitution. 
				 
 Solon then, after a moment's delay, said, In my opinion either a
					king, or a despot, would best gain repute if out of a monarchy he should
					organize a democracy for his people. 
				 
 Next Bias said, If he should be the very first to conform to his
					country's laws. 
				 
 Following him Thales said that he accounted it happiness for a ruler to reach
					old age and die a natural death. 
					 
				 
 Fourth, Anacharsis said, If only he have sound sense. 
				 
 Fifth, Cleobulus, If he trust none of his associates. 
				 
 Sixth, Pittacus, If the ruler should manage to make his subjects fear,
					not him, but for him. 
 
 
 Chilon followed by saying that a ruler's thoughts should never be the
					thoughts of a mortal, but of an immortal always. 
 When these sentiments had been expressed, we insisted that Periander himself
					should also say something. And he, not very cheerful, but with a hard set
					face, said, Well, I may add my view, that the opinions expressed,
						taken as a whole, practically divorce any man possessed of sense from
						being a ruler. 
				 
 Whereupon Aesop, as though taking us to task, said, You ought, then,
					to have carried out this discussion by yourselves, and not, while
					professing to be counsellors and friends, to have made yourselves
					complainants against rulers. 
				 
 Solon then, laying his hand on Aesop's head and smiling the while, said,
					 Don't you think that anyone could make a ruler more moderate and
						a despot more reasonable if he could persuade them that it is better not
						to rule than to rule? 
				 
 
 Who, he replied, would believe you in this matter in
					preference to the god who said, according to the oracle referring to
					you, 
					 Blessed the city that hears the command of one
					herald only? 
				 
 
 Yet it is a fact, said Solon, that even now the
					Athenians hearken to one herald and ruler only, and that one, the law,
					under their democratic constitution. You are clever in understanding
					ravens and jackdaws, but you have no true ear for the voice of equality,
					but think that, according to the god, the city which hearkens to one man
					fares the best, whereas in a social gathering you regard it as a virtue
					to have everybody talk and on every sort of subject. 
				 
 
 Yes, said Aesop, that is because you have not yet
					written a law that slaves shall not get drunk, which would be a similar
					law to fit this case, as at Athens you wrote a law that slaves shall not
					have any love-affair and shall not rub down like athletes. 
 
 
 Solon laughed at this and Cleodorus the physician said, Nevertheless
					rubbing down dry is similar to talking when soaked with wine in that it
					is most agreeable. 
				 
 And Chilon, interrupting, said, The more reason then for refraining
					from it. 
				 
 
 I could swear, said Aesop, speaking again, that
					Thales appeared to bid a man to grow old as fast as possible.

Periander at this burst out laughing, and said, We are fittingly
					punished, Aesop, for becoming involved in other subjects before
					introducing all of those from Amasis, to which we gave precedence. I
					beg, Neiloxenus, that you will look at the rest of 
					 the letter and take advantage of the fact that the
					men are all here together. 
				 
 
 Well, in truth, said Neiloxenus, the demand of the
					Ethiopian can hardly be called anything but a depressing cryptic
					dispatch, to borrow a phrase from Archilochus, but your friend Amasis
					is more civilized and cultivated in proposing such questions; for he
					bade the king name the oldest thing, the most beautiful, the greatest,
					the wisest, the most common, and besides these, as I can attest, to name
					also the most helpful thing and the most harmful, and the strongest and
					the easiest. 
				 
 
					 Did the Ethiopian king give an answer and a solution for each of
						these questions? 
				 
 
 Yes, in his way, said Neiloxenus, but you must
					judge for yourselves when you hear his answers. For my king holds it to be a
					very important matter not to be caught impugning the answers falsely; and
					likewise, if the respondent is making any slip in these, he would not have
					this pass unquestioned. I will read the answers of the Ethiopian as he gave
					them: 
 			 (a) What is the oldest thing? Time. 
 			 (b) What is the greatest? The universe. 
 				 (c) What is the wisest? Truth. 
 					 (d) What is the most beautiful? Light. 
 						 (e) What is most common? Death. 
 							 (f) What is most helpful? God. 
 								 (g) What is most harmful? An evil spirit. 
					 
				 
 			 (h) What is strongest? Fortune. 
 				 (i) What is easiest? Pleasure.

After this second reading, there was silence for a time, and then Thales
					asked Neiloxenus if Amasis had approved the answers. When Neiloxenus replied
					that Amasis had accepted some, but was much dissatisfied with others, Thales
					said, As a matter of fact there is not a thing in them that
					cannot be impugned, but they all contain gross errors and evidences of
					ignorance. For instance, in the very first one, how can time be the oldest
					thing if a part of it is past, a part present, and a part future? For the
					time which is to come would clearly be younger than events and persons that
					now are. And to hold that truth is wisdom seems to me no different from
					declaring that light is the eye. If he thought the light beautiful, as it
					really is, how did he come to overlook the sun itself? Among the others the
					answer about gods and evil spirits evinces boldness and daring, but the one
					about Fortune contains much bad logic; for Fortune would not be so fickle
					about abiding with one if it were the mightiest and strongest thing in
					existence. Nor is death, in fact, the most common thing; for it does not
					affect the living. But, to avoid giving the impression of merely passing
					judgement upon the statements of others, let us compare answers of our own
					with his. And I offer myself as the first, if Neiloxenus so desires, to be
					questioned on each topic; and taking the questions 
 	 in the order given, a I will repeat them, together with
					my answers : 
 			 (a) What is the oldest thing? God, said Thales, for God is something that has no beginning. 
 			 (b) What is greatest? Space; for while the universe contains within
 				it all else, this contains the universe. 
 			 (c) What is most beautiful? The Universe; for everything that is
 				ordered as it should be is a part of it. 
 			 (d) What is wisest? Time; for it has discovered some things already, and
 				shall discover all the rest. 
 			 (e) What is most common? Hope; for those who have nothing else have
 				that ever with them. 
 			 (f) What is most helpful? Virtue; for it makes everything else helpful
 				by putting it to a good use. 
 			 (g) What is most harmful? Vice; for it harms the greatest number of
 				things by its presence. 
 			 (h) What is strongest? Necessity; for that alone is insuperable. 
 			 (i) What is easiest? To follow Nature's course; because people often
 				weary of pleasures.

When all had expressed their satisfaction with Thales, Cleodorus said,
					 Asking and answering such questions is all right for kings. But
						the barbarian who would have Amasis drink up the ocean to do him honour
						needed the terse retort which Pittacus used to Alyattes, when the latter
						wrote and sent an overbearing command to the Lesbians. The only answer
						
						 he made was to tell Alyattes to eat onions and hot
						bread. 
 
 
 Periander now entered into the conversation, and said, Nevertheless
					it is a fact, Cleodorus, that the ancient Greeks also had a habit of
					propounding such perplexing questions to one another. For we have the
					story that the most famous poets among the wise men of that time
					gathered at Chalcis to attend the funeral of Amphidamas. Now Amphidamas
					was a warrior who had given much trouble to the Eretrians, and had
					fallen in one of the battles for the possession of the Lelantine plain.
					But since the verses composed by the poets made the decision a difficult
					and troublesome matter because they were so evenly matched, and since
					the repute of the contestants, Homer and Hesiod, caused the judges much
					perplexity as well as embarrassment, the poets resorted to questionings
					of this sort, and Homer, as Lesches asserts, propounded this: Tell me,
					O Muse, of events which never have happened aforetime, Nor in the future
					shall ever betide, and Hesiod answered quite off-hand: When round Zeus
					in his tomb rush the steeds with galloping hoof-beats, Crashing car
					against car, as they eagerly run for a trophy. And for this it is said
					that he gained the greatest admiration and won the tripod. 
 
 
 
 But what difference is there, said Cleodorus, between
					things like this and Eumetis's riddles? 
					 Perhaps it is not unbecoming for her to amuse
					herself and to weave these as other girls weave girdles and hair-nets,
					and to propound them to women, but the idea that men of sense should
					take them at all seriously is ridiculous. 
				 
 Eumetis, to judge by her appearance, would have liked to give him an answer,
					but restrained herself with all modesty, and her face was covered with
					blushes. But Aesop, as though he would take her part, said, Is it
						not then even more ridiculous not to be able to solve these? Take, for
						instance, the one which she propounded to us a few minutes before
						dinner: Sooth I have seen a man with fire fasten bronze on another. 
						Could you tell me what this is? 
				 
 
 No, said Cleodorus, and I don't want to be told,
					either. 
				 
 
 Yet it is a fact, said Aesop, that nobody knows this
					more perfectly than you, or does it better, either; and if you deny
					this, I have cupping-glasses to testify to it. 
				 
 At this Cleodorus laughed; for of all the physicians of his time he was most
					given to the use of cuppingglasses, and it was largely owing to him that
					this form of treatment has come to have such repute.

Mnesiphilus the Athenian, a warm friend and admirer of Solon's, said,
					 I think it is no more than fair, Periander, that the
						conversation, like the wine, should not be apportioned on the basis of
						wealth or rank, but equally to all, as in a democracy, and that
						
						 it should be general. Now in what has just been
						said dealing with dominion and kingdom, we who live under a popular
						government have no part. Therefore I think that at this time each of you
						ought to contribute an opinion on the subject of republican government,
						beginning again with Solon. 
				 
 It was accordingly agreed to do this, and Solon began by saying, But
					you, Mnesiphilus, as well as all the rest of the Athenians, have heard
					the opinion which I hold regarding government. However, if you wish to
					hear it again now, I think that a State succeeds best, and most
					effectively perpetuates democracy, in which persons uninjured by a
					crime, no less than the injured person, prosecute the criminal and get
					him punished. 
				 
 Second was Bias, who said that the most excellent democracy was that in which
					the people stood in as much fear of the law as of a despot. 
 Following him Thales said that it was the one having citizens neither too
					rich nor too poor. 
 After him Anacharsis said that it was the one in which, all else being held
					in equal esteem, what is better is determined by virtue and what is worse by
					vice. 
 Fifth, Cleobulus said that a people was most righteous whose public men
					dreaded censure more than they dreaded the law. 
 Sixth, Pittacus said that it was where bad men are not allowed to hold
					office, and good men are not allowed to refuse it. 
 			 Chilon, turning to the other side, declared that the 
					 best government is that which gives greatest heed to
					laws and least heed to those who talk about them. 
 Finally, Periander once more concluded the discussion with the decisive
					remark, that they all seemed to him to approve a democracy which was most
					like an aristocracy.

When this discussion had come to an end, I said that it seemed to me to be
					only fair that these men should tell us how a house should be managed.
					 For, said I, but few persons are in control of
						kingdoms and states, whereas we all have to do with a hearth and
						home, 
				 
 Aesop laughed and said, Not all, if you include also Anacharsis in
					our number; for not only has he no home, but he takes an immense pride
					in being homeless and in using a wagon, after the manner in which they
					say the sun makes his rounds in a chariot, occupying now one place and
					now another in the heavens. 
				 
 
 And that, I would have you know, said Anacharsis, is
					precisely the reason why he solely or pre-eminently of all the gods is
					free and independent, and rules over all and is ruled by none, but is
					king, and holds the reins. Only you seem to have no conception of his
					chariot, how surpassing it is in beauty, and wondrous in size; else you
					would not, even in jest, have humorously compared it to ours. It seems
					to me, Aesop, that your idea of a home is limited to these protective
					coverings made of mortar, wood, and tiles, just as if you were to regard
					a snail's shell, and not the creature itself, as a snail. Quite
					naturally, then, Solon gave you occasion to laugh, because, when he had
					looked over Croesus's house with its costly furnishings, he did not
					instantly declare that the owner led a happy and
					blessed existence therein, for the good reason that he wished to have a
					look at the good within Croesus rather than at his good surroundings. 
					But you, apparently, do not remember your own fox. For the fox, having
					entered into a contest with the leopard to determine which was the more
					ingeniously coloured, insisted it was but fair that the judge should
					note carefully what was within her, for there she said she should show
					herself more ingenious. But you go about, inspecting the works of
					carpenters and stonemasons, and regarding them as a home, and not the
					inward and personal possessions of each man, his children, his partner
					in marriage, his friends, and servants; and though it be in an ant-hill
					or a bird's nest, yet if these are possessed of sense and discretion,
					and the head of the family shares with them all his worldly goods, he
					dwells in a goodly and a happy home. This then, said he, 
					is my answer to Aesop's insinuation, and my contribution to Diocles. And
					now it is but right that each of the others should disclose his own
					opinion. 
				 
 Thereupon Solon said that the best home seemed to him to be where no
					injustice is attached to the acquisition of property, no distrust to keeping
					it, and no repentance to spending it. 
 Bias said, It is the home in which the head of the household, because
					of his own self, maintains the same character that he maintains outside
					of it because of the law. 
				 
 Thales said, The home in which it is possible for the head of the
					household to have the greatest leisure. 
					 
				 
 Cleobulus said, If the head of the household have more who love him
					than fear him. 
				 
 Pittacus said that the best home is that which needs nothing superfluous, and
					lacks nothing necessary. 
 Chilon said that the home ought to be most like to a State ruled by a king;
					and then he added that Lycurgus said to the man who urged him to establish a
					democracy in the State, Do you first create a democracy in your own
						house.

When this discussion had come to its end, Eumetis withdrew, accompanied by
					Melissa. Then Periander drank to Chilon in a big beaker, and Chilon did the
					same to Bias, whereupon Ardalus arose, and addressing himself to Aesop,
					said, Won't you send the cup over here to us, seeing that these
						people are sending it to and fro to one another as though it were the
						beaker of Bathycles, and are not giving anybody else a chance at it
						? 
				 
 And Aesop said, But this cup is not democratic either, since it has
					been resting all the time by Solon only. 
				 
 Thereupon Pittacus, addressing Mnesiphilus, asked why Solon did not drink,
 	but by his testimony was discrediting the verses in which he had written 
					
					 
 Give me the tasks of the Cyprus-born goddess and Lord
						Dionysus, Yea, and the Muses besides; tasks which bring cheer among men. 
 
 Before the other could reply Anacharsis hastened to say, He is afraid
					of you, Pittacus, and that harsh law of yours in which you have
					decreed,' If any man commit any offence when drunk, his penalty shall be
					double that prescribed for the sober.' 
 
 
 And Pittacus said, But you at any rate showed such insolent disregard
					for the law, that last year, at the house of Alcaeus's brother, you were
					the first to get drunk and you demanded as a prize a wreath of
					victory. 
 
 
 
 And why not? said Anacharsis. Prizes were offered
					for the man who drank the most, and I was the first'to get drunk; why
					should I not have demanded the reward of my victory? Else do you
					instruct me as to what is the aim in drinking much strong wine other
					than to get drunk. 
				 
 When Pittacus laughed at this, Aesop told the following story: A wolf
					seeing some shepherds in a shelter eating a sheep, came near to them and
					said, What an uproar you would make if I were doing that! 
				 
 
 Aesop, said Chilon, has very properly defended
					himself, for a few moments ago he had his mouth stopped by us, and
					now, later, he sees that others have taken the words out of
					Mnesiphilus's mouth; for it was Mnesiphilus who was asked for a
					rejoinder in defence of Solon. 
				 
 
 And I speak, said Mnesiphilus, with full
					 knowledge that it is Solon's opinion that the task
					of every art and faculty, both human and divine, is the thing that is
					produced rather than the means employed in its production, and the end
					itself rather than the means that contribute to that end. For a weaver,
					I imagine, would hold that his task was a cloak or a mantle rather than
					the arrangement of shuttle-rods or the hanging of loom weights; and so
					a smith would regard the welding of iron or the tempering of an axe
					rather than any one of the things that have to be done for this purpose,
					such as blowing up the fire or getting ready a flux. Even more would an
					architect find fault with us, if we should declare that his task is not
					a temple or a house, but to bore timbers and mix mortar. And the Muses
					would most assuredly feel aggrieved, if we should regard as their task a
					lyre or flutes, and not the development of the characters and the
					soothing of the emotions of those who make use of songs and melodies.
					And so again the task of Aphrodite is not carnal intercourse, nor is
					that of Dionysus strong drink and wine, but rather the friendly feeling,
					the longing, the association, and the intimacy, one with another, which
					they create in us through these agencies. These are what Solon calls 
					 tasks divine, and these he says he loves and pursues above all else,
					now that he has become an old man. And Aphrodite is the artisan who
					creates concord and friendship between men and women, for through their
					bodies, under the influence of pleasure, she at the same time unites and
					welds together their souls. And in the case of the majority of people,
					who are not altogether intimate or too well known to one another,
					Dionysus softens and relaxes their characters with wine, as in a fire, and so provides some means for beginning a
					union and friendship with one another. However, when such men as you,
					whom Periander has invited here, come together, I think there is nothing
					for the wine-cup or ladle to accomplish, but the Muses set discourse in
					the midst before all, a non-intoxicating bowl as it were, containing a
					maximum of pleasure in jest and seriousness combined; and with this
					they awaken and foster and dispense friendliness, allowing the ladle, 
					for the most part, to lie untouched atop of the bowl —a
					thing which Hesiod would prohibit in a company of men better able to
					drink than to converse. As a matter of fact, he continued,
					 as nearly as I can make out, among the men of olden time the
					practice of drinking healths was not in vogue, since each man drank one
					' goblet,' as Homer has said, that is a measured quantity, and later,
 	like Ajax, shared a portion with his neighbour. 
				 
 When Mnesiphilus had said this, Chersias the poet (having been already
					absolved from the charge against him, and recently reconciled with Periander
					at Chilon's solicitation) said, Is it to be inferred, then, that
						Zeus used to pour out the drink for the gods also in measured quantity,
						as Agamemnon did for his nobles, when the gods, dining with Zeus, drank
						to one another? 
				 
 And Cleodorus said, But, Chersias, if certain doves bring to Zeus
					his ambrosia, as you poets say, and with 
					 great difficulty hardly manage to fly over the
					 clashing rocks, do you not believe that his nectar is hard for him to
					get and scarce, so that he is sparing of it, and doles it out charily to
					each god?

Possibly, said Chersias, but since talk of household
					management has come up again, who among you will tell us about what was
					omitted? The topic omitted was, I think, the acquisition of some measure
					of property which shall be sufficient in itself and adequate. 
				 
 
 But, said Cleobulus, for the wise the law has given
					the measure, but with reference to those of the baser sort I will tell a
					story of my daughter's which she told her brother. She said that the
					moon wanted her mother to weave for her a garment to fit her measure;
					and the mother said, How can I weave it to fit your measure? For now I
					see you full and round, and at another time crescent-shaped, and at
					still another but little more than half your full size. And in the same
					way you see, my dear Chersias, there is no measure of possessions that
					can be applied to a foolish and worthless man. Sometimes he is one man
					and sometimes another in his needs, which vary according to his desires
					and fortunes; he is like Aesop's dog, who, as our friend here says, in
					the winter-time curled up as closely as possible because he was so cold,
					and was minded to build himself a house, but when summer returned again,
					and he had stretched himself out to sleep, he appeared to himself so big
					that he thought it was neither a necessary nor a small task to construct
					a house large enough to contain him. Have you not often noticed also,
					Chersias, he continued, those detestable people who at
						one time restrict themselves to utterly small 
						limits as though they purposed to live the simple Spartan life, and at
						another time they think that, unless they have everything possessed by
						all private persons and kings as well, they shall die of want? 
				 
 As Chersias lapsed into silence, Cleodorus took up the conversation and said,
					 But we see that the possessions which even you wise men have are
						distributed by unequal measure, if you be compared one with
						another. 
				 
 And Cleobulus said, Yes, for the law, my good sir, like a weaver,
					assigns to each one of us so much as is fitting, reasonable, and
					suitable. And you, using reason as your law in prescribing diet,
					regimen, and drugs for the sick, do not apportion an equal amount to
					each one, but the proper amount in all cases. 
				 
 Ardalus then joined in and said, Well, then, is there some law which
					commands that comrade of all of you, Solon's foreign friend, Epimenides,
					to abstain from all other kinds of food, and by taking into his mouth a
					bit of the potent no-hunger, which he himself compounds, to go all
					day without luncheon and dinner? 
				 
 This remark arrested the attention of the whole company, and Thales said
					jestingly that Epimenides showed good sense in not wishing to have the
					trouble of grinding his grain and cooking for himself like Pittacus. 
						For, said he, when I was at Eresus, I heard the woman at
							whose house I stayed singing at the mill: Grind, mill, grind; Yes, for
								Pittacus used to grind King of great Mytilene. 
 
 
					 
				 
 Solon said that he was surprised at Ardalus if he had not read the
					regulations governing the manner of living of the man in question, which are
					given in writing in Hesiod's verses. For Hesiod is the one who first sowed
					in the mind of Epimenides the seeds of this form of nourishment, inasmuch as
					it was he who taught that one should seek to find How in mallow and asphodel
						lies an immense advantage. 
 
 
 
 Do you really think, said Periander, that Hesiod ever
					had any such idea in mind? Do you not rather think that, since he was
					always sounding the praises of frugality, he was also summoning us to
					the simplest of dishes as being the most pleasant? For the mallow is
					good eating, and the stalk of the asphodel is luscious; but these
					no-hunger and nothirst drugs (for they are drugs rather than foods), I
					understand, include in their composition a sweet gum and a cheese found
					among barbarian peoples, and a great many seeds of a sort hard to
					procure. How, then, can we concede to Hesiod his Rudder on high in the
						smoke 
 suspended, and All the labours of oxen and stout-toiling mules be
 	abolished, 
 if there is to be need of all this preparation? I am
					surprised at your friend from abroad, Solon, if, when he was recently
					carrying out his great purification for the people of Delos, he did not
					note the memorials and examples of the earliest forms of food being
					brought into the temple there, including, among other 
					 inexpensive and self-propagated foods, mallow and
					asphodel, whose plainness and simplicity it is most likely that Hesiod
					recommends to us. 
				 
 
 Not merely that, said Anacharsis, but both are
					commended as herbs that contribute to health also in greatest
					measure. 
				 
 
 You are quite right, said Cleodorus; for it is clear
					that Hesiod has knowledge of medicine, since there is no lack of
					attention or experience shown in what he has to say about the daily
					course of life, mixing wine, the great value of water, bathing, 
					women, the proper time for intercourse, and the way in which infants
					should sit. But it seems to me that Aesop with better right than
					Epimenides can declare himself the pupil of Hesiod. For the words of the
					hawk to the nightingale first suggested to Aesop the idea of this
					beautiful and ingenious wisdom uttered by many different tongues. But I
					should be glad to listen to Solon; for it is likely that he, having
					been associated with Epimenides for along time at Athens, has learned
					what experience of his or what sophistical argument induced him to
					resort to such a course of living.

Solon said, What need was there to ask him this? For it is plain
					that the next best thing to the greatest and highest of all good is to
					require the minimum amount of food; or is it not the general opinion
					that the greatest good is to require no food at all? j 
 
 Not mine by any means, said Cleodorus, if I must tell
					what lies in my mind, especially as a table 
					 stands here now, which they do away with when food
					is done away with, and it is an altar of the gods of friendship and
					hospitality. And as Thales says that, if the earth be done away with,
					confusion will possess the universe, so this is the dissolution of the
					household. For when the table is done away with, there go with it all
					these other things: the altar fire on the hearth, the hearth itself,
					wine-bowls, all entertainment and hospitality,—the most humane
					and the first acts of communion between man and man; rather is all real
					living abolished, if so be that living is a spending of time by man
					which involves carrying on a series of activities, most of which are
					called for by the need of food and its procurement. And a dreadful
					situation ensues, my friend, regarding agriculture itself. For let
					agriculture be destroyed, and it leaves us our earth again unsightly and
					unclean, filled with unfruitful forests and with streams sweeping on
					unchecked, all owing to man's inaction. And with the destruction of
					agriculture goes also the destruction of all arts and crafts which she
					initiates, and for which she supplies the basis and the material; and
					these all come to naught if she vanishes from the earth. Abolished too
					are the honours paid to the gods, since men will have but little
					gratitude to the Sun, and still less to the Moon, for merely light and
					warmth. Where will there be an altar or where a sacrifice offered to
					Zeus who sends the rain, or to Demeter who initiates the ploughing, or
					to Poseidon who watches over the tender crops? How shall Dionysus be
					the giver of delights, if we shall require none of the gifts which he
					gives? What shall we offer as a sacrifice or libation, and what shall
					we dedicate as first-fruits? All this means the over turning and confusion of our highest concerns. To cling to every form
					of pleasure is utterly irrational, but to avoid every form of pleasure
					is utterly insensate. Let it be granted that there exist some other
					superior pleasures for the soul to enjoy, yet it is not possible to
					discover a way for the body to attain a pleasure more justifiable than
					that which comes from eating and drinking, and this is a fact which no
					man can have failed to observe; for this pleasure men put forward
					openly before all, and share together banquets and table, whereas their
					carnal delights they veil behind the screen of night and deep darkness,
					feeling that to share this pleasure openly is shameless and bestial, as
					it is also not to share the other. 
 
 
 I took up the conversation as Cleodorus left off, and said, But there
					is another point you do not mention, that we banish sleep along with
					food; and with no sleep there can be no dream, and our most ancient and
					respected form of divination is gone for ever. Life will have a
					monotonous sameness, and we might say that the encasement of the soul in
					the body will lack all purpose and effect. The most, and the most
					important, of the bodily organs, tongue, teeth, stomach, and liver, are
					provided as instruments of nutrition, no one of them is inactive, nor is
					it framed for any other form of usefulness. So he who has no need of
					food has no need of a body either; and that again would mean having no
					need of himself! For it is with a body that each one of us exists. This
					then, said I, makes up the contributions which we offer
						to the belly; and if Solon or anybody else desires to impeach them in
						any way, we will listen.

Certainly, said Solon, let us not show ourselves
					to be less discriminating than the Egyptians, who cut open the dead body and
					expose it to the sun, and then cast certain parts of it into the river, and
					perform their offices on the rest of the body, feeling that this part has
					now at last been made clean. For this, in truth, it is which constitutes the
					pollution of our flesh and its bowels of Hell, as it were, teeming with
					frightful streams and wind, intermingled with burning fire and corpses. For
					no living man feeds upon another living creature; nay, we put to death the
					animate creatures and destroy these things that grow in the ground, which
					also are partakers in life, in that they absorb food, and increase in size;
					and herein we do wrong. For anything that is changed from what it was by
					nature into something else is destroyed, and it undergoes utter corruption
					that it may become the food of another. But to refrain entirely from eating
					meat, as they record of Orpheus of old, is rather a quibble than a way of
					avoiding wrong in regard to food. The one way of avoidance and of keeping
					oneself pure, from the point of view of righteousness, is to become
					sufficient unto oneself and to need nothing from any other source. But in
					the case of man or beast for whom God has made his own secure existence
					impossible without his doing injury to another, it may be said that in the
					nature which God has inflicted upon him lies the source of wrong. Would it
					not, then, be right and fair, my friend, in order to cut out injustice, to
					cut out also bowels and stomach and liver, which afford us no perception or
					craving for anything noble, but are 
					 like cooking utensils, such as choppers and kettles,
					and, in another respect, like a baker's outfit, ovens and dough-containers
					and kneading-bowls? Indeed, in the case of most people, one can see that
					their soul is absolutely confined in the darkness of the body as in a mill,
					making its endless rounds in its concern over its need of food; just as we
					ourselves, only a few minutes ago, as a matter of course, neither saw nor
					listened to one another, but each one was bending down, enslaved to his need
					of food. But now that the tables have been removed, we have, as you see,
					been made free, and, with garlands on, we are spending our time in
					conversation and in the enjoyment of one another's society, and we have the
					leisure to do this now that we have come to require no more food for a time.
					Assuming, then, that the state in which we find ourselves at the present
					moment will persist without interruption throughout our whole life, shall we
					not always have leisure to enjoy one another's society, having no fear of
					poverty and no knowledge of what wealth is? For craving for the superfluous
					follows close upon the use of necessities, and soon becomes a settled habit, 
 
					 But Cleodorus imagines that there ought to be food, so that there may
						be tables and wine-bowls and sacrifices to Demeter and the Daughter.
						Then let the next man argue that it is but right and proper that there
						be battles and war, so that we may have fortifications and dockyards and
						arsenals, and may offer sacrifice to celebrate the slaying of an hundred
						foemen, as they say is the custom among the Messenians. Still another
						man, I imagine, may enter 
						 tain a violent hatred against health; for it will
						be a terrible thing if nobody is ill, and there is no longer any use for
						a soft bed or couch, and we shall not offer sacrifice to Asclepius or
						the averting deities, and the profession of medicine together with its
						numerous instruments and remedies shall be consigned to inglorious
						desuetude and contempt. Yet, what difference is there between this sort
						of reasoning and the other? The fact is that food is taken as a remedy
						for hunger, and all who use food in a prescribed way are said to be
						giving themselves treatment, not with the thought they are doing
						something pleasant and grateful, but that this is necessary to comply
						with Nature's imperative demand. Indeed, it is possible to enumerate
						more pains than pleasures derived from food; or rather may it be said
						that the pleasure affects but a very limited area in the body, and lasts
						for no long time; but as for the ugly and painful experiences crowded
						upon us by the bother and discomfort which wait upon digestion, what
						need to tell their number? I think that Homer had their very number
						in view when, in the case of the gods, he finds an argument to prove
						that they do not die in the fact that they do not live by food: Since
							they eat no bread and drink no wine brightly sparkling, Therefore their
							bodies are bloodless, and they are called the Immortals. He intimates by
						this that food is not only an element conducive to life, but that it is
						also conducive to death. For it is from this source that diseases come,
						thriving on the very same food as men's bodies, which find no less ill
						in fulness than in fasting. For oftentimes it is harder work to use up
						and again to distribute food, after it has been
						taken into the body, than it was to procure it and get it together in
						the first place. But just as the Danaids would be at a loss to know what
						kind of life and occupation they should follow if they should be
						relieved of their drudgery in trying to fill the great jar, so we are at
						a loss to know, if perchance we should have the opportunity to cease
						from heaping into this relentless flesh of ours all the multitudinous
						products of land and sea, what we shall do, since, owing to lack of
						acquaintance with noble things, we now content ourselves with the life
						conditioned on necessities. Just as men who have been slaves, when they
						are set free, do for themselves on their own account those very things
						which they used to do in service to their masters, so the soul now
						supports the body with much toil and trouble, but if it be relieved of
						its drudgery, it will quite naturally maintain itself in its new freedom
						and live with an eye to itself and the truth, since there will be
						nothing to distract or divert it. 
				 
 This then, Nicarchus, is what was said on the subject of food.

While Solon was still speaking, Gorgus, Periander's brother, came in; for it
					happened that, in consequence of certain oracles, he had been sent to
					Taenarum, in charge of a sacred mission to offer due sacrifice to Poseidon.
					After we had greeted him, and Periander had embraced and kissed him, Gorgus
					sat down beside his brother on the couch, and gave him a report intended
					apparently for him alone, and he, as he listened, seemed much affected at
					the story; for he appeared in some ways troubled, in some ways indignant,
					and oftentimes incredulous, and then again amazed.
					Finally with a laugh he said to us, In the circumstances I should
						like to tell the news which I have just heard, but I hesitate, since I
						heard Thales say once that what is probable one should tell, but what is
						impossible one should shroud in silence. 
				 
 Thereupon Bias, interrupting, said, But Thales is responsible also
					for this sage remark, that one should not believe enemies even about
					things believable, and should believe friends even about things
					unbelievable; the name enemies he assigned, I think, to the wicked
					and foolish, and friends to the good and sensible. And so,
					Gorgus, he continued, it should be told to all, or
						rather, to compete with those newly invented dithyrambs, there should
						be heard the stronger notes of the story which your arrival has brought
						to us.

Gorgus then told us that his offering of the sacrifice had taken three days,
					and on the last day there was a dance and merry-making, lasting the whole
					night long, down by the shore. The moon was shining bright upon the sea;
					there was no wind, but a perfect calm and stillness, when, afar off, was
					seen a ripple coming towards land close by the promontory, attended by some
					foam and much noise from its rapid movement, so that they all ran down in
					amazement to the place where it was coming to shore. Before they could guess
					what was bearing down upon them so rapidly, dolphins were seen, some forming
					a dense encircling line, others leading the way to the smoothest part of the
					shore, and still others behind, forming, as it were, a rear-guard. In their
					midst, 
					 uplifted above the sea, was a mass like a man's body
					being borne along, but indistinct and ill-defined, until the dolphins drew
					near together, and with one accord came close to the shore, and deposited on
					land a human being, in whom was still the breath of life and power to move;
					then they themselves put forth again towards the promontory leaping even
					higher than before, and sporting and frolicking apparently for joy. 
						Many of us, continued Gorgus, were panic-stricken,
					and fled from the sea-shore, but a few, including myself, grew bold enough
					to draw near, and they recognized Arion the harper, who pronounced his own
					name himself, and was easily recognizable by his dress; for he happened to
					be clad in the ceremonial robes which he had worn when he played and sang. 
 			 We accordingly conducted him to a tent, since there was really
					nothing the matter with him, save that he seemed somewhat unstrung and
					wearied by the swiftness and rush of his ride, and we heard from him a
					story, incredible to all men except to us who with our own eyes had seen its
					conclusion. Arion said that some time ago he had resolved to leave Italy,
					and the receipt of a letter from Periander had only stimulated his desire
					the more, and when a Corinthian merchant-vessel appeared there, he had at
					once embarked and sailed away from that land. For three days they were
					favoured by a moderate breeze, and there came over Arion the feeling that
					the sailors were plotting to make away with him, and later he learned from
					the pilot, who secretly gave him the information, that they were resolved to
					do the deed that night. Helpless and at his wits' end, he put into execution
					an impulse, divinely inspired, to adorn his person, and
					to take for his shroud, while he was still living, the elaborate attire
					which he wore at competitions, and to sing a final song to life as he ended
					it, and not to prove himself in this respect less generous than the swans.
					Accordingly he made himself ready, and, first saying that he was possessed
					by a desire to sing through one of his songs—the ode to Pythian
					Apollo—as a supplication for the safety of himself and the ship
					and all on board, he took his stand beside the bulwark at the stern, and,
					after a prelude invoking the gods of the sea, he began the ode. He had not
					even half finished it as the sun was sinking into the sea and the
					Peloponnesus becoming visible. The sailors therefore waited no longer for
					the night-time, but advanced to the murderous deed; whereupon Arion, seeing
					knives bared and the pilot already covering up his face, ran back and threw
					himself as far away from the ship as possible. But before his body was
					entirely submerged, dolphins swam beneath him, and he was borne upward, full
					of doubt and uncertainty and confusion at first. But when he began to feel
					at ease in being carried in this manner, and saw many dolphins gathering
					around him in a friendly way, and relieving one another as though such
					service in alternation were obligatory and incumbent upon all, and the sight
					of the ship left far behind gave a means to measure their speed, there came
					into his thoughts, as he said, not so much a feeling of fear in the face of
					death, or a desire to live, as a proud longing to be saved that he might be
					shown to be a man loved by the gods, and that he might gain a sure opinion
					regarding them. At the same time, observing that the sky was dotted with
					stars, and the moon was rising bright and clear, while
					the sea everywhere was without a wave as if a path were being opened for
					their course, he bethought himself that the eye of Justice is not a single
					eye only, but through all these eyes of hers God watches in every direction
					the deeds that are done here and there both on land and on the sea. By these
					reflections, he said, the weariness and heaviness which he was already
					beginning to feel in his body were relieved, and when at the last, as the
					jutting promontory, rugged and lofty, appeared in their path, they rounded
					it with great caution, and skirted close to the land as if they were
					bringing a boat safely into harbour, then he fully realized that his rescue
					had been guided by God's hand. 
 
 When Arion had told all this, continued Gorgus, I
					asked him where he thought the ship would make harbour; and he replied
					that it would surely come to Corinth, but its arrival would be much
					later; for he thought that after he had thrown himself overboard in the
					evening, he had been carried a distance of not less than fifty or more
					miles, and a calm had fallen immediately. Gorgus went on to say
					that he had ascertained the name of the captain and of the pilot, and the
					ship's emblem, and had sent out boats and soldiers to the landing-places to
					keep strict watch; moreover, he had brought Arion with him, carefully
					concealed, so that the guilty ones might not gain any premature information
					of his rescue from death, and make good their escape; and in fact the whole
					affair seemed like an event divinely directed, for his men were here just as
					he arrived, and he learned that the ship had been seized, and the traders
					and sailors arrested.

Accordingly Periander bade Gorgus to withdraw at once, and have these men put
					into prison where nobody should have access to them or tell them that Arion
					had been rescued. 
 
 Well! well! said Aesop, you all make fun of my
					jackdaws and crows if they talk with one another, and yet dolphins
					indulge in such pranks as this! 
				 
 
 Let's change the subject, Aesop, said I to him; more
					than a thousand years have elapsed since this dolphin story has been
					believed and committed to writing in Greek lands, even from the days of
					Ino and Athamas. 
 
 
 Solon here entered the conversation: Well, Diocles, let it be granted
					that these things are near to the gods and far beyond us; but what
					happened to Hesiod is human and within our ken. Very likely you have
					heard the story. 
 
 
 
 No, I have not, said I. 
 
					 Well, it is really worth hearing, and so here it is. A man from
						Miletus, it seems, with whom Hesiod shared lodging and entertainment in
						Locris, had secret relations with the daughter of the man who
						entertained them; and when he was detected, Hesiod fell under suspicion
						of having known about the misconduct from the outset, and of having
						helped to conceal it, although he was in nowise guilty, but only the
						innocent victim of a fit of anger and prejudice. For the girl's brothers
						killed him, lying in wait for him in the vicinity of the temple of
						Nemean Zeus in Locris, and with him they killed his servant whose name
						was Troilus. The dead bodies were
						 shoved out into the sea, and the body of Troilus,
						borne out into the current of the river Daphnus, was caught on a
						wave-washed rock projecting a little above the sea-level; and even to
						this day the rock is called Troilus. The body of Hesiod, as soon as it
						left the land, was taken up by a company of dolphins, who conveyed it to
						Rhium hard by Molycreia. It happened that the Locrians' periodic Rhian
						sacrifice and festal gathering was being held then, which even nowadays
						they celebrate in a noteworthy manner at that place. When the body was
						seen being carried towards them, they were naturally filled with
						astonishment, and ran down to the shore; recognizing the corpse, which
						was still fresh, they held all else to be of secondary importance in
						comparison with investigating the murder, on account of the repute of
						Hesiod. This they quickly accomplished, discovered the murderers, sank
						them alive in the sea, and razed their house to the ground. Hesiod was
						buried near the temple of Nemean Zeus; most foreigners do not know
						about his grave, but it has been kept concealed, because, as they say,
						it was sought for by the people of Orchomenos, who wished, in accordance
						with an oracle, to recover the remains and bury them in their own land.
						If, therefore, dolphins show such a tender and humane interest in the
						dead, it is even more likely that they should give aid to the living,
						and especially if they are charmed by the sound of flutes or some songs
						or other. For we are all well aware of the fact that these creatures
						delight in music and follow after it, and swim along beside men who are
						rowing to the accompaniment of song and flute in a calm, and they enjoy
						travelling in this way. They take delight also in
						children's swimming, and vie with them in diving. For this reason they
						profit also by an unwritten law of immunity; for nobody hunts them or
						injures them except when they get into the fishermen's nets, and do
						havoc with the catch, and then they are punished with a whipping like
						naughty children. I remember also hearing from some men of Lesbos that
						the rescue of a certain maiden from the sea was effected by a dolphin,
						but, as I am not sure of the various details, it is only right that
						Pittacus, who does know them, should relate the tale.

Pittacus thereupon said that it was a famous story, and one mentioned by
					many, to this effect. An oracle had been given to those who were setting out
					to found a colony in Lesbos that when their voyage should bring them to a
					reef which is called Midland, then they should cast into the
					sea at that place a bull as an offering to Poseidon, and to Amphitrite and
					the Nymphs of the sea a living virgin. The commanders were seven in number,
					all kings, and the eighth was Echelaüs, designated by the oracle at
					Delphi to head the colony, although he was young and still unmarried. The
					seven, or as many as had unmarried daughters, cast lots, and the lot fell
					upon the daughter of Smintheus. Her they adorned with fine raiment and
					golden ornaments as they arrived opposite the spot, and purposed, as soon as
					they had offered prayer, to cast her into the sea. It happened that one of
					the company on board, a young man of no mean origin as it seems, was in love
					with her. His name, according to a tradition still preserved, was 
					 Enalus. He, conceiving a despairing desire to help the
					maiden in her present misfortune, at the critical moment hurriedly clasped
					her in his arms, and threw himself with her into the sea. Straightway a
					rumour spread, having no sure foundation, but nevertheless carrying
					conviction to many in the community, regarding their safety and rescue.
					Later, as they say, Enalus appeared in Lesbos, and told how they had been
					borne by dolphins through the sea, and put ashore unharmed on the mainland.
					Other things he related more miraculous even than this, which astonished and
					fascinated the crowd, and he gave good grounds for believing them all by a
					deed which he did; for when a towering wave precipitated itself on the
					shores of the island, and the people were in a state of terror, he, all by
					himself, went to meet the sea, and cuttlefish followed him to the shrine of
					Poseidon, the biggest of which brought a stone with him, and this stone
					Enalus took and dedicated there, and this we call Enalus. And in
						general, he continued, if a man realizes a difference
							between the impossible and the unfamiliar, and between false reasoning
							and false opinion, such a man, Chilon, who would neither believe nor
							disbelieve at haphazard, would be most observant of the precept, Avoid
							extremes, as you have enjoined.

Following him Anacharsis said that as Thales had set forth the excellent
					hypothesis that soul exists in all the most dominant and most important
					parts of the universe, there is no proper ground for wonder that the most
					excellent things are brought 
					 to pass by the will of God. For the
						body, he continued, is the soul's instrument, and the
							soul is God's instrument; and just as the body has many movements of
							its own, but the most, and most excellent, from the soul, so the soul
							performs some actions by its own instinct, but in others it yields
							itself to God's use for Him to direct it and turn it in whatsoever
							course He may desire, since it is the most adaptable of all instruments.
							For it is a dreadful mistake to assume that, on the one hand, fire is
							God's instrument, and wind and water also, and clouds and rain, by means
							of which He preserves and fosters many a thing, and ruins and destroys
							many another, but that, on the other hand, He never as yet makes any use
							whatever of living creatures to accomplish any one of His purposes. Nay,
							it is far more likely that the living, being dependent on God's power,
							serve Him and are responsive to His movements even more than bows are
							responsive to the Scythians or lyres and flutes to the Greeks. 
				 
 Thereupon the poet Chersias cited, among the eases of persons who had been
					saved when their plight seemed hopeless, the case of Cypselus, the father
					of Periander, who, when he was a new-born babe, smiled at the men who had
					been sent to make away with him, and they turned away. And when again they
					changed their minds, they sought for him and found him not, for he had been
					put away in a chest by his mother. It was because of this that Cypselus
					constructed the building at Delphi, firmly believing that the god had at
					that time stopped his crying so that he might escape the notice of those who
					were searching for him. 
 And Pittacus, addressing Periander, said, Chersias certainly did well to mention the building, for I have often desired,
					Periander, to ask you the reason for those frogs, and what is their
					significance, carved as they are in such numbers about the base of the
					palm-tree, and what relation they have to the god or to the
					dedicator. 
				 
 Periander bade him ask Chersias, for Chersias, he said, knew and was present
					when Cypselus consecrated the building; but Chersias said with a smile,
					 No, I will not tell until I learn from our friends here what
						significance they give to the precepts, 
						 Avoid extremes and Know
						thyself, and, in particular, that one which has kept many from
						marrying, and many from trusting, and some even from speaking, and this
						is it: Give a pledge, and mischief attends. 
				 
 
 What need of us to tell you that? said Pittacus; 
					since for this long time you have been praising the stories which Aesop
					has composed touching each of them, as it seems. 
				 
 And Aesop said, Only when Chersias is poking fun at me; but when he
					is serious he points to Homer as their inventor, and says that Hector
					'knew himself' because he attacked all the others, but Only with Ajax,
					Telamon's son, he avoided a conflict. And Odysseus, he says, gives
					praise to Avoid extremes when he enjoins 
					 
 Son of Tydeus, praise me not too much nor chide
						me. 
 And as for the pledge, other people think that Homer vilifies it as
					a worthless and futile thing when he says, Worthless are pledges of
						worthless folk to accept at their pledging; 
 but Chersias here asserts
					that Mischief was hurled from heaven by Zeus because she was present at
					the pledge which Zeus gave when he was befooled in regard to the birth
					of Heracles. 
 
 
 Solon here put in his word: Well, then, we should have faith in the
					very great wisdom of Homer who also says, 
 Night-time advances apace:
						'tis well to pay heed to the night-time. So, if it please the company,
					let us offer a libation to the Muses and Poseidon and Amphitrite, and be
					going. 
				 
 			 And thus, Nicarchus, the party came to an end.