Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will
of God, and our brother Sosthenes,

to the assembly of God which
is at Corinth; those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
saints, with all who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every
place, both theirs and ours:

Grace to you and peace from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

I always thank my God concerning you, for the grace of God
which was given you in Christ Jesus;

that in everything you were
enriched in him, in all speech and all knowledge;

even as the
testimony of Christ was confirmed in you:

so that you come behind
in no gift; waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;

who will also confirm you until the end, blameless in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

God is faithful, through whom you were called
into the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord.

Now I
beg you, brothers, through the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ, that you
all speak the same thing and that there be no divisions among you, but
that you be perfected together in the same mind and in the same
judgment.

For it has been reported to me concerning you, my
brothers, by those who are from Chloe's household, that there are
contentions among you.

Now I mean this, that each one of you
says, "I follow Paul," "I follow Apollos," "I follow Cephas," and, "I
follow Christ."

Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you?
Or were you baptized into the name of Paul?

I thank God that I
baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius,

so that no one
should say that I had baptized you into my own name.

(I also
baptized the household of Stephanas; besides them, I don't know whether
I baptized any other.)

For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel -- not in wisdom of words, so that the cross of
Christ wouldn't be made void.

For the word of the cross is
foolishness to those who are dying, but to us who are saved it is the
power of God.

For it is written,
"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
 I will bring the discernment of the discerning to nothing."

Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the lawyer
of this world? Hasn't God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

For seeing that in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom
didn't know God, it was God's good pleasure through the foolishness of
the preaching to save those who believe.

For Jews ask for signs,
Greeks seek after wisdom,

but we preach Christ crucified; a
stumbling block to Jews, and foolishness to Greeks,

but to those
who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and
the wisdom of God.

Because the foolishness of God is wiser than
men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

For you see
your calling, brothers, that not many are wise according to the flesh,
not many mighty, and not many noble;

but God chose the foolish
things of the world that he might put to shame those who are wise. God
chose the weak things of the world, that he might put to shame the
things that are strong;

and God chose the lowly things of the
world, and the things that are despised, and the things that are not,
that he might bring to nothing the things that are:

that no
flesh should boast before God.

But of him, you are in Christ
Jesus, who was made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness and
sanctification, and redemption:

that, according as it is
written, "He who boasts, let him boast in the Lord."

When I came to you, brothers, I didn't come with excellence of
speech or of wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God.

For
I determined not to know anything among you, except Jesus Christ, and
him crucified.

I was with you in weakness, in fear, and in much
trembling.

My speech and my preaching were not in persuasive
words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power,

that your faith wouldn't stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God.

We speak wisdom, however, among those who are full
grown; yet a wisdom not of this world, nor of the rulers of this world,
who are coming to nothing.

But we speak God's wisdom in a
mystery, the wisdom that has been hidden, which God foreordained before
the worlds to our glory,

which none of the rulers of this world
has known. For had they known it, they wouldn't have crucified the Lord
of glory.

But as it is written,
"Things which an eye didn't see, and an ear didn't hear,
 Which didn't enter into the heart of man,
These God has prepared for those who love him."

But to us, God revealed them through the Spirit. For the
Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God.

For who
among men knows the things of a man, except the spirit of the man,
which is in him? Even so, no one knows the things of God, except God's
Spirit.

But we received, not the spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that were
freely given to us by God.

Which things also we speak, not in
words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual things.

Now the
natural man doesn't receive the things of God's Spirit, for they are
foolishness to him, and he can't know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

But he who is spiritual discerns all
things, and he himself is judged by no one.

"For who has known
the mind of the Lord, that he should instruct him?" But we have
Christ's mind.

Brothers, I couldn't speak to you as to spiritual, but as to
fleshly, as to babies in Christ.

I fed you with milk, not with
meat; for you weren't yet ready. Indeed, not even now are you ready,

for you are still fleshly. For insofar as there is jealousy,
strife, and factions among you, aren't you fleshly, and don't you walk
in the ways of men?

For when one says, "I follow Paul," and
another, "I follow Apollos," aren't you fleshly?

Who then is
Apollos, and who is Paul, but servants through whom you believed; and
each as the Lord gave to him?

I planted. Apollos watered. But God
gave the increase.

So then neither he who plants is anything, nor
he who waters, but God who gives the increase.

Now he who plants
and he who waters are the same, but each will receive his own reward
according to his own labor.

For we are God's fellow workers. You
are God's farming, God's building.

According to the grace of God
which was given to me, as a wise master builder I laid a foundation,
and another builds on it. But let each man be careful how he builds on
it.

For no one can lay any other foundation than that which has
been laid, which is Jesus Christ.

But if anyone builds on the
foundation with gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, or stubble;

each man's work will be revealed. For the Day will declare it,
because it is revealed in fire; and the fire itself will test what sort
of work each man's work is.

If any man's work remains which he
built on it, he will receive a reward.

If any man's work is
burned, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved, but as
through fire.

Don't you know that you are a temple of God, and that God's
Spirit lives in you?

If anyone destroys the temple of God, God
will destroy him; for God's temple is holy, which you are.

Let
no one deceive himself. If anyone thinks that he is wise among you in
this world, let him become a fool, that he may become wise.

For
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written,
"He has taken the wise in their craftiness."

And again, "The
Lord knows the reasoning of the wise, that it is worthless."

Therefore let no one boast in men. For all things are yours,

whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death,
or things present, or things to come. All are yours,

and you are
Christ's, and Christ is God's.

So let a man think of us as Christ's servants, and stewards of
God's mysteries.

Here, moreover, it is required of stewards, that
they be found faithful.

But with me it is a very small thing that
I should be judged by you, or by man's judgment. Yes, I don't judge my
own self.

For I know nothing against myself. Yet I am not
justified by this, but he who judges me is the Lord.

Therefore
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord comes, who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and reveal the counsels
of the hearts. Then each man will get his praise from God.

Now these things, brothers, I have in a figure transferred to
myself and Apollos for your sakes, that in us you might learn not to
think beyond the things which are written, that none of you be puffed
up against one another.

For who makes you different? And what do
you have that you didn't receive? But if you did receive it, why do you
boast as if you had not received it?

You are already filled. You
have already become rich. You have come to reign without us. Yes, and I
wish that you did reign, that we also might reign with you.

For,
I think that God has displayed us, the apostles, last of all, like men
sentenced to death. For we are made a spectacle to the world, both to
angels and men.

We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise
in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You have honor, but we have
dishonor.

Even to this present hour we hunger, thirst, are
naked, are beaten, and have no certain dwelling place.

We toil,
working with our own hands. Being reviled, we bless. Being persecuted,
we endure.

Being defamed, we entreat. We are made as the filth
of the world, the dirt wiped off by all, even until now.

I don't
write these things to shame you, but to admonish you as my beloved
children.

For though you have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet
not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus, I became your father through the
gospel.

I beg you therefore, be imitators of me.

Because
of this I have sent Timothy to you, who is my beloved and faithful
child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways which are in Christ,
even as I teach everywhere in every assembly.

Now some are
puffed up, as though I were not coming to you.

But I will come
to you shortly, if the Lord is willing. And I will know, not the word
of those who are puffed up, but the power.

For the Kingdom of
God is not in word, but in power.

What do you want? Shall I come
to you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of gentleness?

It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among
you, and such sexual immorality as is not even named among the
Gentiles, that one has his father's wife.

You are puffed up, and
didn't rather mourn, that he who had done this deed might be removed
from among you.

For I most assuredly, as being absent in body but
present in spirit, have already, as though I were present, judged him
who has done this thing.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
you being gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ,

are to deliver such a one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

Your boasting is not good. Don't you know that a little yeast
leavens the whole lump?

Purge out the old yeast, that you may be
a new lump, even as you are unleavened. For indeed Christ, our
Passover, has been sacrificed in our place.

Therefore let us keep
the feast, not with old yeast, neither with the yeast of malice and
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

I wrote to you in my letter to have no company with sexual sinners;

yet not at all meaning with the sexual sinners of this world, or
with the covetous and extortioners, or with idolaters; for then you
would have to leave the world.

But as it is, I wrote to you not
to associate with anyone who is called a brother who is a sexual
sinner, or covetous, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner. Don't even eat with such a person.

For what have
I to do with also judging those who are outside? Don't you judge those
who are within?

But those who are outside, God judges. "Put away
the wicked man from among yourselves."

Dare any of you, having a matter against his neighbor, go to
law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?

Don't you
know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is judged
by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

Don't you
know that we will judge angels? How much more, things that pertain to
this life?

If then, you have to judge things pertaining to this
life, do you set them to judge who are of no account in the assembly?

I say this to move you to shame. Isn't there even one wise man
among you who would be able to decide between his brothers?

But
brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers!

Therefore it is already altogether a defect in you, that you have
lawsuits one with another. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be
defrauded?

No, but you yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that
against your brothers.

Or don't you know that the unrighteous
will not inherit the Kingdom of God? Don't be deceived. Neither the
sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor male prostitutes,
nor homosexuals,

nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
slanderers, nor extortioners, will inherit the Kingdom of God.

Such were some of you, but you were washed. But you were sanctified.
But you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit
of our God.

"All things are lawful for me," but not all things
are expedient. "All things are lawful for me," but I will not be
brought under the power of anything.

"Foods for the belly, and
the belly for foods," but God will bring to nothing both it and them.
But the body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord; and the
Lord for the body.

Now God raised up the Lord, and will also
raise us up by his power.

Don't you know that your bodies are
members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them members of a prostitute? May it never be!

Or don't you know
that he who is joined to a prostitute is one body? For, "The two," says
he, "will become one flesh."

But he who is joined to the Lord is
one spirit.

Flee sexual immorality! "Every sin that a man does
is outside the body," but he who commits sexual immorality sins against
his own body.

Or don't you know that your body is a temple of
the Holy Spirit which is in you, which you have from God? You are not
your own,

for you were bought with a price. Therefore glorify
God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.

Now concerning the things about which you wrote to me: it is
good for a man not to touch a woman.

But, because of sexual
immoralities, let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have
her own husband.

Let the husband render to his wife the affection
owed her, and likewise also the wife to her husband.

The wife
doesn't have authority over her own body, but the husband. Likewise
also the husband doesn't have authority over his own body, but the
wife.

Don't deprive one another, unless it is by consent for a
season, that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer, and may be
together again, that Satan doesn't tempt you because of your lack of
self-control.

But this I say by way of concession, not of commandment.

Yet I wish that all men were like me. However each man has his own gift
from God, one of this kind, and another of that kind.

But I say
to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they remain even
as I am.

But if they don't have self-control, let them marry. For
it's better to marry than to burn.

But to the married I command
-- not I, but the Lord -- that the wife not leave her husband

(but if she departs, let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to
her husband), and that the husband not leave his wife.

But to the rest I -- not the Lord -- say, if any brother has
an unbelieving wife, and she is content to live with him, let him not
leave her.

The woman who has an unbelieving husband, and he is
content to live with her, let her not leave her husband.

For the
unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife
is sanctified in the husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean,
but now are they holy.

Yet if the unbeliever departs, let there
be separation. The brother or the sister is not under bondage in such
cases, but God has called us in peace.

For how do you know,
wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband,
whether you will save your wife?

Only, as the Lord has
distributed to each man, as God has called each, so let him walk. So I
command in all the assemblies.

Was anyone called having been circumcised? Let him not become
uncircumcised. Has anyone been called in uncircumcision? Let him not be
circumcised.

Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.

Let each
man stay in that calling in which he was called.

Were you called
being a bondservant? Don't let that bother you, but if you get an
opportunity to become free, use it.

For he who was called in the
Lord being a bondservant is the Lord's free man. Likewise he who was
called being free is Christ's bondservant.

You were bought with
a price. Don't become bondservants of men.

Brothers, let each
man, in whatever condition he was called, stay in that condition with
God.

Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment from the Lord,
but I give my judgment as one who has obtained mercy from the Lord to
be trustworthy.

I think that it is good therefore, because of
the distress that is on us, that it is good for a man to be as he is.

Are you bound to a wife? Don't seek to be freed. Are you free
from a wife? Don't seek a wife.

But if you marry, you have not
sinned. If a virgin marries, she has not sinned. Yet such will have
oppression in the flesh, and I want to spare you.

But I say
this, brothers: the time is short, that from now on, both those who
have wives may be as though they had none;

and those who weep,
as though they didn't weep; and those who rejoice, as though they
didn't rejoice; and those who buy, as though they didn't possess;

and those who use the world, as not using it to the fullest. For
the mode of this world passes away.

But I desire to have you to
be free from cares. He who is unmarried is concerned for the things of
the Lord, how he may please the Lord;

but he who is married is
concerned about the things of the world, how he may please his wife.

There is also a difference between a wife and a virgin. The
unmarried woman cares about the things of the Lord, that she may be
holy both in body and in spirit. But she who is married cares about the
things of the world -- how she may please her husband.

This I
say for your own profit; not that I may ensnare you, but for that which
is appropriate, and that you may attend to the Lord without
distraction.

But if any man thinks that he is behaving
inappropriately toward his virgin, if she is past the flower of her
age, and if need so requires, let him do what he desires. He doesn't
sin. Let them marry.

But he who stands steadfast in his heart,
having no necessity, but has power over his own heart, to keep his own
virgin, does well.

So then both he who gives his own virgin in
marriage does well, and he who doesn't give her in marriage does
better.

A wife is bound by law for as long as her husband lives;
but if the husband is dead, she is free to be married to whoever she
desires, only in the Lord.

But she is happier if she stays as
she is, in my judgment, and I think that I also have God's Spirit.

Now concerning things sacrificed to idols: We know that we all
have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.

But if
anyone thinks that he knows anything, he doesn't yet know as he ought
to know.

But if anyone loves God, the same is known by him.

Therefore concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know
that no idol is anything in the world, and that there is no other God
but one.

For though there are things that are called "gods,"
whether in the heavens or on earth; as there are many "gods" and many
"lords;"

yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom are all
things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are
all things, and we live through him.

However, that knowledge
isn't in all men. But some, with consciousness of the idol until now,
eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being
weak, is defiled.

But food will not commend us to God. For
neither, if we don't eat, are we the worse; nor, if we eat, are we the
better.

But be careful that by no means does this liberty of
yours become a stumbling block to the weak.

For if a man sees
you who have knowledge sitting in an idol's temple, won't his
conscience, if he is weak, be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to
idols?

And through your knowledge, he who is weak perishes, the
brother for whose sake Christ died.

Thus, sinning against the
brothers, and wounding their conscience when it is weak, you sin
against Christ.

Therefore, if food causes my brother to stumble,
I will eat no meat forevermore, that I don't cause my brother to
stumble.

Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Haven't I seen Jesus
Christ, our Lord? Aren't you my work in the Lord?

If to others I
am not an apostle, yet at least I am to you; for you are the seal of my
apostleship in the Lord.

My defense to those who examine me is
this.

Have we no right to eat and to drink?

Have we no
right to take along a wife who is a believer, even as the rest of the
apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?

Or have only
Barnabas and I no right to not work?

What soldier ever serves at
his own expense? Who plants a vineyard, and doesn't eat of its fruit?
Or who feeds a flock, and doesn't drink from the flock's milk?

Do
I speak these things according to the ways of men? Or doesn't the law
also say the same thing?

For it is written in the law of Moses,
"You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain." Is it for
the oxen that God cares,

or does he say it assuredly for our
sake? Yes, it was written for our sake, because he who plows ought to
plow in hope, and he who threshes in hope should partake of his hope.

If we sowed to you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
reap your fleshly things?

If others partake of this right over
you, don't we yet more? Nevertheless we did not use this right, but we
bear all things, that we may cause no hindrance to the gospel of
Christ.

Don't you know that those who serve around sacred things
eat from the things of the temple, and those who wait on the altar have
their portion with the altar?

Even so the Lord ordained that
those who proclaim the gospel should live from the gospel.

But I
have used none of these things, and I don't write these things that it
may be done so in my case; for I would rather die, than that anyone
should make my boasting void.

For if I preach the gospel, I have
nothing to boast about; for necessity is laid on me; but woe is to me,
if I don't preach the gospel.

For if I do this of my own will, I
have a reward. But if not of my own will, I have a stewardship
entrusted to me.

What then is my reward? That, when I preach the
gospel, I may present the gospel of Christ without charge, so as not to
abuse my authority in the gospel.

For though I was free from
all, I brought myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the more.

To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; to those
who are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain those who
are under the law;

to those who are without law, as without law
(not being without law toward God, but under law toward Christ), that I
might win those who are without law.

To the weak I became as
weak, that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to all men,
that I may by all means save some.

Now I do this for the
gospel's sake, that I may be a joint partaker of it.

Don't you
know that those who run in a race all run, but one receives the prize?
Run like that, that you may win.

Every man who strives in the
games exercises self-control in all things. Now they do it to receive a
corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

I therefore run like
that, as not uncertainly. I fight like that, as not beating the air,

but I beat my body and bring it into submission, lest by any
means, after I have preached to others, I myself should be rejected.

Now I would not have you ignorant, brothers, that our fathers
were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;

and
were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

and
all ate the same spiritual food;

and all drank the same
spiritual drink. For they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them,
and the rock was Christ.

However with most of them, God was not
well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness.

Now
these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted.

Neither be idolaters, as some
of them were. As it is written, "The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play."

Neither let us commit sexual immorality,
as some of them committed, and in one day twenty-three thousand fell.

Neither let us test the Lord, as some of them tested, and
perished by the serpents.

Neither grumble, as some of them also
grumbled, and perished by the destroyer.

Now all these things
happened to them by way of example, and they were written for our
admonition, on whom the ends of the ages have come.

Therefore
let him who thinks he stands be careful that he doesn't fall.

No temptation has taken you but such as man can bear. God is
faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted above what you are able,
but will with the temptation also make the way of escape, that you may
be able to endure it.

Therefore, my beloved, flee from
idolatry.

I speak as to wise men. Judge what I say.

The
cup of blessing which we bless, isn't it a communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, isn't it a communion of the body of
Christ?

Because we, who are many, are one bread, one body; for
we all partake of the one bread.

Consider Israel after the
flesh. Don't those who eat the sacrifices have communion with the altar?

What am I saying then? That a thing sacrificed to idols is
anything, or that an idol is anything?

But I say that the
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, and not
to God, and I don't desire that you would have communion with demons.

You can't both drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons.
You can't both partake of the table of the Lord, and of the table of
demons.

Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger
than he?

"All things are lawful for me," but not all things are
profitable. "All things are lawful for me," but not all things build
up.

Let no one seek his own, but each one his neighbor's good.

Whatever is sold in the butcher shop, eat, asking no question
for the sake of conscience,

for "the earth is the Lord's, and
its fullness."

But if one of those who don't believe invites
you to a meal, and you are inclined to go, eat whatever is set before
you, asking no questions for the sake of conscience.

But if
anyone says to you, "This was offered to idols," don't eat it for the
sake of the one who told you, and for the sake of conscience. For "the
earth is the Lord's, and all its fullness."

Conscience, I say,
not your own, but the other's conscience. For why is my liberty judged
by another conscience?

If I partake with thankfulness, why am I
denounced for that for which I give thanks?

Whether therefore
you eat, or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.

Give no occasions for stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks,
or to the assembly of God;

even as I also please all men in all
things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit of the many, that
they may be saved.

Be imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ.

Now I
praise you, brothers, that you remember me in all things, and hold firm
the traditions, even as I delivered them to you.

But I would
have you know that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the
woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.

Every man
praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors his head.

But every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled
dishonors her head. For it is one and the same thing as if she were
shaved.

For if a woman is not covered, let her also be shorn.
But if it is shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be
covered.

For a man indeed ought not to have his head covered,
because he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of
the man.

For man is not from woman, but woman from man;

for neither was man created for the woman, but woman for the man.

For this cause the woman ought to have authority on her head,
because of the angels.

Nevertheless, neither is the woman independent of the man,
nor the man independent of the woman, in the Lord.

For as woman
came from man, so a man also comes through a woman; but all things are
from God.

Judge for yourselves. Is it appropriate that a woman
pray to God unveiled?

Doesn't even nature itself teach you that
if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him?

But if a woman
has long hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given to her for a
covering.

But if any man seems to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither do God's assemblies.

But in giving you this command, I don't praise you, that you
come together not for the better but for the worse.

For first
of all, when you come together in the assembly, I hear that divisions
exist among you, and I partly believe it.

For there also must
be factions among you, that those who are approved may be revealed
among you.

When therefore you assemble yourselves together, it
is not possible to eat the Lord's supper.

For in your eating
each one takes his own supper before others. One is hungry, and another
is drunken.

What, don't you have houses to eat and to drink in?
Or do you despise God's assembly, and put them to shame who don't have?
What shall I tell you? Shall I praise you? In this I don't praise you.

For I received from the Lord that which also I delivered to
you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took
bread.

When he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, "Take,
eat. This is my body, which is broken for you. Do this in memory of
me."

In the same way he also took the cup, after supper,
saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as
you drink, in memory of me."

For as often as you eat this bread
and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.

Therefore whoever eats this bread or drinks the Lord's cup in
an unworthy manner will be guilty of the body and the blood of the
Lord.

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the
bread, and drink of the cup.

For he who eats and drinks in an
unworthy manner eats and drinks judgment to himself, if he doesn't
discern the Lord's body.

For this cause many among you are weak
and sickly, and not a few sleep.

For if we discerned ourselves,
we wouldn't be judged.

But when we are judged, we are punished
by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.

Therefore, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait one for
another.

But if anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, lest
your coming together be for judgment. The rest I will set in order
whenever I come.

Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I don't want you to
be ignorant.

You know that when you were heathen, you were led
away to those mute idols, however you might be led.

Therefore I
make known to you that no man speaking by God's Spirit says, "Jesus is
accursed." No one can say, "Jesus is Lord," but by the Holy Spirit.

Now there are various kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit.

There are various kinds of service, and the same Lord.

There are various kinds of workings, but the same God, who works all
things in all.

But to each one is given the manifestation of the
Spirit for the profit of all.

For to one is given through the
Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge,
according to the same Spirit;

to another faith, by the same
Spirit; and to another gifts of healings, by the same Spirit;

and to another workings of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to
another discerning of spirits; to another different kinds of languages;
and to another the interpretation of languages.

But the one and
the same Spirit works all of these, distributing to each one separately
as he desires.

For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of the body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ.

For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether
Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free; and were all given to drink into
one Spirit.

For the body is not one member, but many.

If the foot would say, "Because I'm not the hand, I'm not part of the
body," it is not therefore not part of the body.

If the ear
would say, "Because I'm not the eye, I'm not part of the body," it's
not therefore not part of the body.

If the whole body were an
eye, where would the hearing be? If the whole were hearing, where would
the smelling be?

But now God has set the members, each one of
them, in the body, just as he desired.

If they were all one
member, where would the body be?

But now they are many members,
but one body.

The eye can't tell the hand, "I have no need for
you," or again the head to the feet, "I have no need for you."

No, much rather, those members of the body which seem to be weaker are
necessary.

Those parts of the body which we think to be less
honorable, on those we bestow more abundant honor; and our
unpresentable parts have more abundant propriety;

whereas our
presentable parts have no such need. But God composed the body
together, giving more abundant honor to the inferior part,

that
there should be no division in the body, but that the members should
have the same care for one another.

When one member suffers,
all the members suffer with it. Or when one member is honored, all the
members rejoice with it.

Now you are the body of Christ, and members individually.

God has set some in the assembly: first apostles, second
prophets, third teachers, then miracle workers, then gifts of healings,
helps, governments, and various kinds of languages.

Are all
apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are all miracle workers?

Do all have gifts of healings? Do all speak with various
languages? Do all interpret?

But earnestly desire the best
gifts. Moreover, I show a most excellent way to you.

If I speak with the languages of men and of angels, but don't
have love, I have become sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal.

If I have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries and all
knowledge; and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but
don't have love, I am nothing.

If I dole out all my goods to
feed the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but don't have love,
it profits me nothing.

Love is patient and is kind; love doesn't envy. Love doesn't
brag, is not proud,

doesn't behave itself inappropriately,
doesn't seek its own way, is not provoked, takes no account of evil;

doesn't rejoice in unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth;

bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures
all things.

Love never fails. But where there are prophecies,
they will be done away with. Where there are various languages, they
will cease. Where there is knowledge, it will be done away with.

For we know in part, and we prophesy in part;

but when that
which is complete has come, then that which is partial will be done
away with.

When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I felt as a
child, I thought as a child. Now that I have become a man, I have put
away childish things.

For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but
then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, even
as I was also fully known.

But now faith, hope, and love remain
-- these three. The greatest of these is love.

Follow after love, and earnestly desire spiritual gifts, but
especially that you may prophesy.

For he who speaks in another
language speaks not to men, but to God; for no one understands; but in
the Spirit he speaks mysteries.

But he who prophesies speaks to
men for their edification, exhortation, and consolation.

He who
speaks in another language edifies himself, but he who prophesies
edifies the assembly.

Now I desire to have you all speak with
other languages, but rather that you would prophesy. For he is greater
who prophesies than he who speaks with other languages, unless he
interprets, that the assembly may be built up.

But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking with other
languages, what would I profit you, unless I speak to you either by way
of revelation, or of knowledge, or of prophesying, or of teaching?

Even things without life, giving a voice, whether pipe or harp,
if they didn't give a distinction in the sounds, how would it be known
what is piped or harped?

For if the trumpet gave an uncertain
sound, who would prepare himself for war?

So also you, unless
you uttered by the tongue words easy to understand, how would it be
known what is spoken? For you would be speaking into the air.

There are, it may be, so many kinds of sounds in the world, and none of
them is without meaning.

If then I don't know the meaning of
the sound, I would be to him who speaks a foreigner, and he who speaks
would be a foreigner to me.

So also you, since you are zealous
for spiritual gifts, seek that you may abound to the building up of the
assembly.

Therefore let him who speaks in another language pray
that he may interpret.

For if I pray in another language, my
spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.

What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also. I will sing with the spirit, and I
will sing with the understanding also.

Otherwise if you bless
with the spirit, how will he who fills the place of the unlearned say
the "Amen" at your giving of thanks, seeing he doesn't know what you
say?

For you most assuredly give thanks well, but the other
person is not built up.

I thank my God, I speak with other
languages more than you all.

However in the assembly I would
rather speak five words with my understanding, that I might instruct
others also, than ten thousand words in another language.

Brothers, don't be children in thoughts, yet in malice be
babies, but in thoughts be mature.

In the law it is written,
"By men of strange languages and by the lips of strangers I will speak
to this people. Not even thus will they hear me, says the Lord."

Therefore other languages are for a sign, not to those who
believe, but to the unbelieving; but prophesying is for a sign, not to
the unbelieving, but to those who believe.

If therefore the
whole assembly is assembled together and all speak with other
languages, and unlearned or unbelieving people come in, won't they say
that you are crazy?

But if all prophesy, and someone
unbelieving or unlearned comes in, he is reproved by all, and he is
judged by all.

And thus the secrets of his heart are revealed.
So he will fall down on his face and worship God, declaring that God is
among you indeed.

What is it then, brothers? When you come together, each one
of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has another
language, has an interpretation. Let all things be done to build each
other up.

If any man speaks in another language, let it be two,
or at the most three, and in turn; and let one interpret.

But
if there is no interpreter, let him keep silent in the assembly, and
let him speak to himself, and to God.

Let the prophets speak,
two or three, and let the others discern.

But if a revelation
is made to another sitting by, let the first keep silent.

For
you all can prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
exhorted.

The spirits of the prophets are subject to the
prophets,

for God is not a God of confusion, but of peace.

 As in all the assemblies of the saints,

let your wives keep
silent in the assemblies, for it has not been permitted for them to
speak; but let them be in subjection, as the law also says.

If
they desire to learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at home,
for it is shameful for a woman to chatter in the assembly.

What? Was it from you that the word of God went out? Or did it come to
you alone?

If any man thinks himself to be a prophet, or
spiritual, let him recognize the things which I write to you, that they
are the commandment of the Lord.

But if anyone is ignorant, let
him be ignorant.

Therefore, brothers, desire earnestly to
prophesy, and don't forbid speaking with other languages.

Let
all things be done decently and in order.

Now I declare to you, brothers, the gospel which I preached
to you, which also you received, in which you also stand,

by
which also you are saved, if you hold firmly the word which I preached
to you -- unless you believed in vain.

For I delivered to you
first of all that which I also received: that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures,

that he was buried, that he was
raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,

and that he
appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.

Then he appeared to over
five hundred brothers at once, most of whom remain until now, but some
have also fallen asleep.

Then he appeared to James, then to all
the apostles,

and last of all, as to the child born at the wrong
time, he appeared to me also.

For I am the least of the
apostles, who is not worthy to be called an apostle, because I
persecuted the assembly of God.

But by the grace of God I am
what I am. His grace which was bestowed on me was not futile, but I
worked more than all of them; yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me.

Whether then it is I or they, so we preach, and so you
believed.

Now if Christ is preached, that he has been raised from the
dead, how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the
dead?

But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has
Christ been raised.

If Christ has not been raised, then our
preaching is in vain, and your faith also is in vain.

Yes, we
are found false witnesses of God, because we testified about God that
he raised up Christ, whom he didn't raise up, if it is so that the dead
are not raised.

For if the dead aren't raised, neither has
Christ been raised.

If Christ has not been raised, your faith
is vain; you are still in your sins.

Then they also who are
fallen asleep in Christ have perished.

If we have only hoped in
Christ in this life, we are of all men most pitiable.

But now Christ has been raised from the dead. He became the
first fruits of those who are asleep.

For since death came by
man, the resurrection of the dead also came by man.

For as in
Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.

But
each in his own order: Christ the first fruits, then those who are
Christ's, at his coming.

Then the end comes, when he will
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; when he will have
abolished all rule and all authority and power.

For he must
reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.

The last
enemy that will be abolished is death.

For, "He put all things
in subjection under his feet." But when he says, "All things are put in
subjection," it is evident that he is excepted who subjected all things
to him.

When all things have been subjected to him, then the
Son will also himself be subjected to him who subjected all things to
him, that God may be all in all.

Or else what will they do who
are baptized for the dead? If the dead aren't raised at all, why then
are they baptized for the dead?

Why do we also stand in
jeopardy every hour?

I affirm, by the boasting in you which I
have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.

If I fought with
animals at Ephesus for human purposes, what does it profit me? If the
dead are not raised, then "let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."

Don't be deceived! "Evil companionships corrupt good morals."

Wake up righteously, and don't sin, for some have no knowledge
of God. I say this to your shame.

But someone will say, "How
are the dead raised?" and, "With what kind of body do they come?"

You foolish one, that which you yourself sow is not made alive
unless it dies.

That which you sow, you don't sow the body that
will be, but a bare grain, maybe of wheat, or of some other kind.

But God gives it a body even as it pleased him, and to each
seed a body of its own.

All flesh is not the same flesh, but
there is one flesh of men, another flesh of animals, another of fish,
and another of birds.

There are also celestial bodies, and
terrestrial bodies; but the glory of the celestial differs from that of
the terrestrial.

There is one glory of the sun, another glory
of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs from
another star in glory.

So also is the resurrection of the dead.
It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption.

It is
sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is
raised in power.

It is sown a natural body; it is raised a
spiritual body. There is a natural body and there is also a spiritual
body.

So also it is written, "The first man, Adam, became a living
soul." The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.

However that
which is spiritual isn't first, but that which is natural, then that
which is spiritual.

The first man is of the earth, made of
dust. The second man is the Lord from heaven.

As is the one
made of dust, such are those who are also made of dust; and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

As we have
borne the image of those made of dust, let's also bear the image of the
heavenly.

Now I say this, brothers, that flesh and blood can't
inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does corruption inherit
incorruption.

Behold, I tell you a mystery. We will not all sleep, but we
will all be changed,

in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be
raised incorruptible, and we will be changed.

For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

But when this corruptible will have put on
incorruption, and this mortal will have put on immortality, then what
is written will happen: "Death is swallowed up in victory."

"Death, where is your sting?
 Hades, where is your victory?"

The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.

But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast,
immovable, always abounding in the Lord's work, because you know that
your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I commanded
the assemblies of Galatia, you do likewise.

On the first day of
the week, let each one of you save, as he may prosper, that no
collections be made when I come.

When I arrive, I will send
whoever you approve with letters to carry your gracious gift to
Jerusalem.

If it is appropriate for me to go also, they will go
with me.

But I will come to you when I have passed through
Macedonia, for I am passing through Macedonia.

But with you it
may be that I will stay, or even winter, that you may send me on my
journey wherever I go.

For I do not wish to see you now in
passing, but I hope to stay a while with you, if the Lord permits.

But I will stay at Ephesus until Pentecost,

for a great
and effective door has opened to me, and there are many adversaries.

Now if Timothy comes, see that he is with you without fear, for
he does the work of the Lord, as I also do.

Therefore let no
one despise him. But set him forward on his journey in peace, that he
may come to me; for I expect him with the brothers.

Now concerning Apollos, the brother, I begged him much to
come to you with the brothers; and it was not at all his desire to come
now; but he will come when he has an opportunity.

Watch! Stand firm in the faith! Be courageous! Be strong!

Let all that you do be done in love.

Now I beg you, brothers (you know the house of Stephanas,
that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have set
themselves to minister to the saints),

that you also be in
subjection to such, and to everyone who helps in the work and labors.

I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus;
for that which was lacking on your part, they supplied.

For
they refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore acknowledge those who are
like that.

The assemblies of Asia greet you. Aquila and Priscilla greet
you much in the Lord, together with the assembly that is in their
house.

All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a
holy kiss.

This greeting is by me, Paul, with my own hand.

If
any man doesn't love the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Come,
Lord!

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

My love to all of you in Christ Jesus. Amen.