INTRODUCTION 
						 Anyone who reads some of the many articles which have been
							written about the Sayings of Kings and Commanders found in Plutarch's
							works would almost certainly gain the impression that the whole book is
							a tasteless forgery; yet a closer study would probably convince him that
							the Sayings are, in the main, just as truly the work of Plutarch as the
							poems of Sappho or Alcaeus which we now possess are the works of those
							authors. The only question, then, is how it happens that the Sayings
							stand in their present form, and this will doubtless serve as a topic
							for debate in the future, as it has in the past, since it can never be
							definitely settled. 
						 The assumption that the whole book is a forgery can only be regarded as
							nonsense. Many of the stories included here are found also in other
							writers, such, for example, as Aelian, Polyaenus, or Valerius Maximus,
							and the relation between the versions found in the different writers is
							quite the same as the relation between other stories found in the
							indisputably genuine works of Plutarch and the versions found in other
							writers. 
						 A second assumption that some of the stories were put together by a
							later writer who copied them largely from Plutarch's Lives (when there
							were Lives from which they could be copied) is more plausible in the case of many of the Sayings, especially
							since the versions often coincide (in whole or part) in language. At the
							same time a comparison of the versions found here with the versions
							found in the Lives, for example, of Phocion, or Fabius Maximus, or the
							elder Cato, will probably serve to convince an unprejudiced reader that
							these were not copied verbatim from the Lives, but that they have been
							put down independently from the same or the original source. A special
							stress is laid by those who uphold this theory upon the words ταῦτα μὲν ὕστερον (196 e), but that again
							is only a natural observation which anyone writing a memorandum might
							properly make regarding that incident, and anyone enthusiastic in
							supporting the genuineness of the Sayings might equally well suggest
							that this was an observation of some copyist, put down as a marginal
							note, which has crept into the text. 
						 There remains, then, the possibility that the Sayings are in the main
							the work of Plutarch, written by him in practically their present form,
							and that some of these were copied into the Lives rather than from the
							Lives. Plutarch himself tells us, in Moralia 464 f and 457 D, that he was in the habit of making collections of notes of this
							sort, and certainly nothing could be more natural than that the author
							of the Lives, to say nothing of the Moralia, should get together some of
							his material in more accessible form, especially in view of the
							difficulty, in ancient times, of consulting books, which were written
							and kept in the form of a roll. The arrangement of the Sayings of Kings
							and Commanders is roughly chronological, with
							some retrogressions. The Greeks (and Persians) and the Romans are
							grouped separately. If these sayings were extracted from the Lives by a
							writer as dullwitted as many would have us believe he was, it might
							reasonably be expected that he would have jumbled the Greeks and the
							Romans together as they are alternated, in the Lives, but such is not
							the case. It will be noted that the names of the Spartans whose sayings
							are recorded in a similar collection are arranged in alphabetical order
							for convenience in consultation. 
						 In Lampriass catalogue of Plutarch's works the Sayings of Kings and
							Commanders is listed as No. 108, and Stobaeus, in his Florilegium,
							quotes from it freely. Of the large number of quotations from this work
							which are to be found in Stobaeus an overwhelming majority agree in
							language either verbatim or almost verbatim, and are not in agreement
							verbatim with variant versions found elsewhere in the Lives or the
							Moralia or in Aelian or Polyaenus. In one case Stobaeus (Florilegium,
							liv. 43 = Moralia 788 d and not 187c) seems to have preferred aversion
							found elsewhere in the Moralia, and in one other case (vii. 48 = Life of
							Lycurgus, chap. xx. 4, rather than Moralia, 190 d, or 215 d) a version
							found in the Lives. It is clear, then, that the book was in existence as
							an independent volume in the time of Stobaeus, and probably earlier. 
						 Whether Plutarch ever meant that this collection should be published, or
							whether he himself provided the introduction addressed to the Emperor
							Trajan, are questions of minor importance. In ancient times, no doubt,
							as in later days royalty could not afford to 
							spend too much time with books, and welcomed predigested
							information. 
						 Plutarch very seldom tells the same story in the same words. Over and
							over again in his works we find a story repeated with minor variations
							in language, or in expansion or condensation, which often serve to adapt
							it better to its context, or, again, seem to serve no purpose except to
							avoid sameness ; and so with the stories in this collection : when they
							are repeated in other parts of Plutarch's works they almost always show
							the same minor variations which are so characteristic of Plutarch. 
						 
						 It is an interesting academic study, for those to whom such studies
							appeal, to compare the different versions of the same story, and to try
							to draw conclusions as to which version is derived from the other, or
							the others (as has been done by Carl Schmidt, De
								apophthegmatum quae sub Plutarchi nomine feruntur
								collectionibus , Greifswalde, 1879), but such
							studies are bound to be unconvincing at best. 
						 
						 Of many of the stories there is no variant version. Some were doubtless
							used in lives or essays by Plutarch which are now lost, and some were
							doubtless meant to be included in lives or essays which were never
							written. 
						 The collection in whole or in part is probably as well known as anything
							that Plutarch has written, for parts of it have become proverbial, and
							so it is not surprising that some of the sayings have been attributed to
							other well-known men, both ancient and modern, or that other men both
							ancient and modern have given utterance to them as their own.

Artaxerxes, the king of the Persians, O Trajan, Emperor
							Most High and Monarch Supreme, used to think that, as compared with
							giving large gifts, it was no less the mark of a king and a lover of his
							fellow-men to accept small gifts graciously and with a ready goodwill;
							and so, on a time when he was riding by, and a simple labourer,
							possessed of nothing else, took up water from the river in his two hands
							and offered it to the king, he accepted it pleasantly and with a
							cheerful smile, measuring the favour by the ready goodwill of the giver
							and not by the service rendered by the gift. 
						 
						 Lycurgus made the sacrifices in Sparta very inexpensive, so that people might be able always to honour the gods readily
							and easily from what they had at hand. And so, with some such thought in
							mind, I likewise offer to you trifling gifts and tokens of friendship,
							the common offerings of the first-fruits that come from philosophy,
								 and I beg that you will
								 be good enough to accept, in conjunction
							with the author's ready goodwill, the utility which may be found in
							these brief notes, if so be that they contain something meet for the
							true understanding of the characters and predilections of men in high
							places, which are better reflected in their words than in their actions.
							True it is that a work of mine comprises the lives also of the most
							noted rulers, lawgivers, and monarchs among the Romans and the Greeks;
							but their actions, for the most part, have an admixture of chance,
							whereas their pronouncements and unpremeditated utterance in connexion
							with what they did or experienced or chanced upon afford an opportunity
							to observe, as in so many mirrors, the workings of the mind of each man.
							In keeping herewith is the remark of Seiramnes the Persian who, in
							answer to those who expressed surprise because, while his words showed
							sense, his actions were never crowned with success, said that he himself
							was master of his words, but chance, together with the King, was master
							of his actions. 
						 
						 In the Lives the pronouncements of the men have the story of the men's
							actions adjoined in the same pages, and so must wait for the time when
							one has the desire to read in a leisurely way; but here the remarks,
							made into a separate collection quite by themselves, serving, so to
							speak, as samples and primal elements of the men's lives, will not, I
							think, be any serious tax on your time, and you will get in brief
							compass an opportunity to pass in review many men who have proved
							themselves worthy of being remembered.

The Persians are enamoured of hook-nosed persons, because
							of the fact that Cyrus, the best loved of their kings, had a nose of
							that shape.

Cyrus said that those who are unwilling to procure good
							things for themselves must of necessity procure them for others. He also
							said that no man has any right to rule who is not better than the people
							over whom he rules.

When the Persians wished to acquire a level and tractable
							land in place of their own, which was mountainous and rugged, Cyrus
							would not allow them to do so, saying that both the seeds of plants and
							the lives of men are bound to be like the land of their origin.

Darius, the father of Xerxes, said in praise of himself
							that in battles and in the face of formidable dangers he became more
							cool and collected.

After fixing the amount of the taxes which his subjects were
							to pay, he sent for the leading men of the provinces, and asked them if
							the taxes were not perhaps heavy; and when the men said that the taxes
							were moderate, he ordered that each should pay only half as much.

As Darius was opening a big pomegranate, someone inquired
							what there was of which he would like to have as many in number as the
							multitude of seeds in the pomegranate, and he replied, Men like Zopyrus. 
							 Zopyrus was a brave man and a friend of
							his.

Zopyrus, by disfiguring himself with his own hands and
							cutting off his nose and ears, tricked the Babylonians, and by winning
							their confidence succeeded in handing over the city to Darius. Many a
							time Darius said that he would not take an hundred Babylons as the price
							of not having Zopyrus unscathed.

Semiramis caused a great tomb to be prepared for herself, and
							on it this inscription : Whatsoever king finds
								himself in need of money may break into this monument and take as
								much as he wishes. Darius accordingly broke into it, but found
							no money; he did, however, come upon another inscription reading as
							follows : If you were not a wicked man with an
								insatiate greed for money, you would not be disturbing the places
								where the dead are laid.

Ariamenes, the brother of Xerxes son of Darius, was on his
							way down from the Bactrian country to contest Xerxes' right to the
							kingdom. Xerxes accordingly sent him gifts, bidding those who offered
							them to say, With these gifts Xerxes your brother
								now honours you; and if he be proclaimed king, you shall be the highest at his court. When
							Xerxes was designated as the king, Ariamenes at once paid homage to him,
							and placed the crown upon his brother's head, and Xerxes gave him a rank
							second only to himself.

Angered at the Babylonians, who had revolted, he overpowered them, and then ordained that henceforth
							they should not bear arms, but should play the i lyre and flute, keep
							public prostitutes, engage in I petty trade, and wear long flowing
								garments.

He said he would not eat figs from Attica which had been
							imported for sale, but would eat them when he had obtained possession of
							the land that bore them.

When he caught Greek spies in his camp, he did them no
							injury, but, after bidding them observe his army freely, let them go.

Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, called ' Longhand,' because
							of his having one hand longer than the other used to say that it is more kingly to give to one who has
							than to take away.

He was the first to issue an order that any of his
							companions in the hunt who could and would might throw their spears
							without waiting for him to throw first.

He was the first to ordain this form of punishment for those
							of the ruling class who offended : Instead of
							having their bodies scourged and the hair plucked from their heads, they
							took off their outer garments and these were scourged, and put off their
							head-dress and this was plucked.

Satibarzanes, his chamberlain, made a dishonourable request
							of him, and it came to his knowledge that the man was doing this for
							thirty thousand pounds; whereupon he directed his treasurer to bring him
							thirty thousand pounds, and, as he gave the money to his chamberlain, he
							said, Take this, Satibarzanes; for if I make you
								this gift I shall not be poorer, but if I do that deed I shall be
								more dishonourable !

Cyrus the younger, in urging the Spartans to ally
							themselves with him, said that he had a stouter heart than his brother,
							and that he could drink more strong wine than his brother could and
							carry it better; moreover, that at hunts his brother could hardly stay
							on his horse, and at a time of terror not even on his throne. Cyrus
							urged the Spartans to send him men, promising to give horses to the
							foot-soldiers, chariots to those who had horses, villages to those who
							owned farms, and to make those who had villages the masters of cities;
							and as for gold and silver there should be no counting, but weighing
							instead.

Artaxerxes, Cyrus's brother, called Mnemon, not only granted audience freely to those who
							wished to speak with him, but also bade his wife draw aside the curtains
							from her carriage so that those who desired might speak with her on the
							road.

A poor man brought to him an apple of extraordinary size
							which he accepted with pleasure, and at the same time he remarked, By Mithras I swear it seems to me that this man
								would make a big city out of a small one if it were entrusted to his
								charge.

Once in a precipitate retreat his baggage was plundered, and
							as he ate dry figs and barley-bread he exclaimed, What a pleasure is this which has never been mine before!

Parysatis, the mother of Cyrus and Artaxerxes, advised that
							he who was intending to talk frankly with the king should use words of
							softest texture.

Orontes, the son-in-law of King Artaxerxes, became involved
							in disgrace because of an accusation, and,
							when the decision was given against him, he said that, as
							mathematicians' fingers are able to represent tens of thousands at one
							time, and at another time only units, so
							it was the same with the friends of kings : at one time they are
							omnipotent and at another time almost impotent.

Memnon, who was waging war against Alexander on the side of
							King Darius, when one of
							his mercenary soldiers said many libellous and indecent things of
							Alexander, struck the man with his spear, saying, I pay you to fight Alexander, not to malign him.

The kings of the Egyptians, in accordance with a rule of
							their own, used to require their judges to swear that, even if the king
							should direct them to decide any case unfairly, they would not do so.

Poltys, king of the Thracians at the time of the Trojan
							war, when once both the Trojans and the Greeks sent deputations to him
							at the same time, bade Alexander restore Helen and accept a couple of
							beautiful women from him,

Teres, the father of Sitalces, used to say that whenever
							he had nothing to do and was not in the field with his army he felt that
							there was no difference between himself and his grooms.

Cotys was once presented with a leopard, and he presented
							the donor with a lion in return. He was by nature very irascible and
							prone to punish severely any lapses in service. On a time when a friend
							from abroad brought him some vessels of earthenwrare, very fragile and
							delicate, wrought with figures in relief in a realistic and highly
							artistic manner, he gave presents to the friend, but broke all the
							vessels in pieces, so that I, as he said, may not in anger punish too severely those that
								break them.

Idanthyrsus, the king of the Scythians, against whom Darius
							crossed the Danube, tried to persuade the despots of the lonians to
							break up the bridge that spanned the river, and then withdraw. But when
							they were not willing to do so because of their plighted word to Darius,
							he called them good slaves who would never run away.

Ateas wrote to Philip : You are the
								ruler of the Macedonians who have learned to fight against men; but
								I am ruler of the Scythians who are able to fight against both
								hunger and thirst. 
						 
						 While he was engaged in currying his horse he asked the ambassadors who
							had come from Philip whether Philip did this. 
						 Having captured in battle Ismenias, the very best of flute-players, he
							bade him play a tune. Everybody else was filled with admiration, but
							Ateas swore that it gave him more pleasure to
							hear his horse neigh.

Scilurus, who left eighty sons surviving him, when he was
							at the point of death handed a bundle of javelins to each son in turn
							and bade him break it. After they had all given up, he took out the
							javelins one by one and easily broke them all, thereby teaching the
							young men that, if they stood together, they would continue strong, but
							that they would be weak if they fell out and quarrelled.

Gelon, the despot, after vanquishing the Carthaginians off
							Himera, forced them, when he made peace with them, to include in the
							treaty an agreement to stop sacrificing their children to Cronus,

He often led out the Syracusans to plant their fields, as if
							it had been for a campaign, so that the land should be improved by being
							worked, and the men should not deteriorate by being idle.

He asked for money from the citizens, and, when they began
							to murmur, he said that he was asking for it with the intent to repay,
							and he did repay it when the war was over.

At a party a lyre was passed around, and the others, one after the other, tuned it and sang,
							but the king ordered his horse to be led in, and nimbly and easily leapt
							upon its back.

Hiero, who succeeded Gelo as despot, used to say that not
							one of the persons who spoke frankly to him chose the wrong time.

He felt that those who divulged a secret committed a serious
							offence also against those to whom they divulged it; for we hate, not
							only those who divulge such things, but also those who hear what we do
							not wish them to hear.

On being reviled by someone for his offensive breath, he
							blamed his wife for never having told him about this; but she said, I supposed that all men smelled so.

In answer to Xenophanes of Colophon, who had said that he
							could hardly maintain two servants, Hiero said, But Homer, whom you disparage, maintains more than ten thousand,
								although he is dead.

He caused Epieharmus the comic poet to be punished because
							he made an indecent remark in the presence of his wife.

Dionysius the Elder, when the speakers who were to address
							the people were drawing by lot the letters of the alphabet to determine
							their order of speaking, drew the letter M; and in answer to the man who
								 said, Muddle-head you
								are, Dionysius, he replied, No ! Monarch
								I am to be, and after he had addressed the people he was at once
							chosen general by the Syracusans.

When, at the beginning of his rule, he was being besieged as
							the result of a conspiracy against him among the citizens, his friends
							advised him to abdicate unless he wished to be overpowered and put to
							death. But, on seeing that an ox slaughtered by a cook fell instantly,
							he said, Is it not then distasteful that we, for
								fear of death which is so momentary, should forsake such a mighty
								sovereignty ?

Learning that his son, to whom he was intending to bequeath
							his empire, had debauched the wife of a free citizen, he asked the young
							man, with some heat, what act of his father's he knew of like that! And
							when the youth answered, None, for you did not
								have a despot for a father. 
							 Nor will you have a son, was the reply, unless you stop doing this sort of thing.

At another time he went into his son's house, and, observing
							a vast number of gold and silver drinking-cups, he exclaimed, There is no despot in you, for with all the
								drinking-cups which you are always getting from me you have not made
								for yourself a single friend.

He levied money on the Syracusans, and later, when he saw
							them lamenting and begging and protesting that they had none, he ordered
							a second levy, and this he did twice or thrice. But
							when, after calling for still more, he heard that they laughed and
							jeered as they went about in the market-place, he ordered a halt in the proceeding; For now they
								really have nothing, said he, since they
								hold us in contempt.

When his mother, who was well on in years, wanted to get
							married, he said that he had the power to violate the laws of the State,
							but not the laws of Nature.

While he punished relentlessly all other malefactors, he was
							very lenient with the footpads, so that the Syracusans should stop their
							dining and drinking together.

A stranger professed that he would tell him privately and
							instruct him how to know beforehand those who were plotting against him,
							and Dionysus bade him speak; whereupon the stranger came close to him
							and said, Hand me a talent that you may give the
								impression that you have heard about the plotters' secret signs; 
							and Dionysius gave it, pretending that he had heard, and marvelling at
							the man's clever tactics.

To the man who inquired if he were at leisure he said, I hope that may never happen to me !

Hearing that two young men at a drinking party had said much
							that was slanderous about him and his rule, he invited them both to
							dinner. And when he saw that the one drank much and talked freely, and
							the other indulged in drink sparingly and with great circumspection, he
							let the former go free, holding him to be by nature a hard drinker and a
							slanderous talker when in his cups, but the latter he caused to be put
							to death, holding that this man was disaffected and hostile as the
							result of deliberate choice.

When some blamed him for honouring and 
							 advancing a bad man who was loathed by the
							citizens, he said, But it is my wish that there
								shall be somebody more hated than myself.

When ambassadors from Corinth 
							declined hi,s proffered gifts because of the law, which did not allow
							members of an embassy to receive gifts from a potentate, he said that
							they were playing a scurvy trick in taking away the only advantage
							possessed by despotism, and teaching that even a favour from a despot is
							a thing to be feared.

Hearing that one of the citizens had some gold buried at his
							house he ordered the man to bring it to him. But when the man succeeded
							in keeping back a part of it, and later removed to another city and
							bought a farm, Dionysius sent for him, and bade him take the whole
							amount belonging to him, since he had now begun to use his wealth, and
							was no longer making a useful thing useless.

The Younger Dionysius used to say that he gave bed and board
							to many learned men, not because he felt any admiration for them, but
							because he wished through them to gain admiration for himself.

When Polyxenus, who was skilled in
							argumentation, asserted that he had confuted the king, the latter said,
								 Yes, very likely by your words, but by your
								deeds I confute you; for you forsake your own affairs, and pay court
								to me and mine.

He was compelled to abdicate, and when a man said to him, What help have Plato and philosophy given to you ? his answer was : The power to submit to so great a change of
								fortune without repining.

On being asked how his father, who was a poor man and a
							private citizen, had gained control over the Syracusans, and how he, who
							held control, and was the son of a despot, had come to lose it, he said,
								 My father embarked upon his venture at a time
								when democracy was hated, but I at a time when despotism was
								odious.

Being asked this same question by another man, he said, My father bequeathed to me his kingdom, but not
								his luck.

Agathocles was the son of a potter. After he had made
							himself master of Sicily, and had been proclaimed king, he used to have
							drinking-cups of pottery placed beside those of gold, and as he pointed
							these out to the young men he would say, That is
								the sort of thing which I used to do formerly, but this is what I do
								now because of my diligence and fortitude.

When he was besieging a city, some of the people on the wall
							reviled him, saying, Potter, how are you going to
								pay your soldiers' wages ? But he, unruffled and smiling, said,
								 If I take this town. And after he had
							taken it by storm he sold the captives as slaves, and said, If you revile me again, what I have to say will
								be said to your masters.

When the people of Ithaca complained of his sailors because
							they had put in at the island and had forcibly carried off some of the
							animals, he said, But your king carne to us, and
								not only took our flocks, but also blinded their shepherd, and went
								his way.

When Dion, who expelled Dionysius from his kingdom, heard
							that a plot against him was being set on foot by Callippus, in whom he
							placed the greatest trust above all other friends, both those at home
							and those from abroad, he could not bring himself to investigate, but
							said, It is better to die than to live in a state
								of continual watchfulness not only against one's enemies but also
								against one's friends.

When Archelaus, at a convivial gathering, was asked for a
							golden cup by one of his acquaintances of a type not commendable for
							character, he bade the servant give it to Euripides; and in answer to
							the man's look of astonishment, he said, It is
								true that you have a right to ask for it, but Euripides has a right
								to receive it even though he did not ask for it.

When a garrulous barber asked him, How shall I cut your hair ? he said, In
								silence.

When Euripides threw his arms around the fair Agathon in
							the midst of an evening party and kissed him,
							for all that Agathon was already bearded, Archelaus said to his friends,
								 Do not be astonished; for even the autumn of
								the fair is fair.

When Timotheus the harp-player had hopes of receiving a
							goodly sum, but received less, he plainly showed that he felt resentful
							towards Archelaus; and, once, as he was singing this brief line : Over the earth-born silver you rave. 
							 he directed it towards
							Archelaus; whereupon Archelaus retorted upon him with this, That, however, is what you crave.

When somebody had thrown water upon him, and he was incited
							by his friends against the man, he said, But it
								was not upon me that he threw it, but upon the man he thought me to
								be.

Theophrastus has recorded that Philip, the father of
							Alexander, was not only great among kings, but, owing to his fortune and
							his conduct, proved himself still greater and more moderate

He said that he must congratulate the Athenians on their
							happy fortune if they could find ten men every year to elect as
							generals; for he himself in many years had found only one general,
							Parmenio.

When several happy events were reported to him within a
							single day, he said, O Fortune, do me some little ill to offset so many good
								things like these !

After his victory over the Greeks, when some were advising
							him to hold the Greek cities in subjection by means of garrisons, he
							said that he preferred to be called a good man for a long time rather
							than a master for a short time.

When his friends advised him to banish from his court a man
							who maligned him, he said he would not, so that the man should not go
							about speaking ill of him among more people.

When Smicythus remarked maliciously of Nicanor that he was
							always speaking ill of Philip, and Philip's companions thought that he
							ought to send for Nicanor and punish him, Philip said, But really Nicanor is not the worst of the
								Macedonians. We must investigate therefore whether something is not
								happening for which we are responsible. When he learned
							therefore that Nicanor was hard pressed by poverty, and had been
							neglected by him he directed that a present be given to the man. So when
							again Smicythus said that Nicanor was continually sounding the praises
							of Philip to everybody in a surprising way, Philip said, You all see that we ourselves are responsible for
								the good and the ill that is said of us.

He said that he felt very grateful to the popular leaders
							of the Athenians, because by maligning him they made him better both in
							speech and in character, For I try both by my
								words and by my deeds to prove that they are liars.

When all the Athenians who had been taken captive at Chaeroneia were set free by him
							without ransom, but asked for the return of their clothing and
							bedding besides, and complained against the Macedonians, Philip laughed
							and said to his men, Does it not seem to you that
								the Athenians think they have been beaten by us in a game of
								knucklebones ?

When the keybone of his shoulder had been broken in battle,
								 and the attending physician insistently
							demanded a fee every day, he said, Take as much as
								you wish; for you have the key in your charge !

Of two brothers, Both and Each, he observed that Each was
							sensible and practical, and Both was silly and foolish, and he remarked
							that Each was both and Both was neither!

Those who counselled him to treat the Athen ians harshly he
							said were silly in urging a man who did everything and underwent
							everything for the sake of repute to throw away his chance to exhibit
							it.

Being called upon to decide a suit between two knaves, he
							ordered the one to flee from Macedonia, and the other to pursue him.

When he was about to pitch his camp in an excellent place,
							he learned that there was no grass for the pack-animals. What a life is ours, he said, if we must live to suit the convenience of the
								asses !

When he was desirous of capturing a certain stronghold, his
							scouts reported that it was altogether difficult and quite impregnable,
							whereupon he asked if it were so difficult that
							not even an ass laden with money could approach it.

When the men associated with Lasthenes, the Olynthian,
							complained with indignation because some of Philip's associates called
							them traitors, he said that the
							Macedonians are by nature a rough and rustic people who call a spade a
							spade.

He recommended to his son that he associate with the
							Macedonians so as to win their favour, and thus acquire for himself
							influence with the masses while another was reigning and while it was
							possible for him to be humane.

He also advised him that, among the men of influence in the
							cities, he should make friends of both the good and the bad, and that
							later he should use the former and abuse the latter.

Philon the
							Theban had been his benefactor and host during the time he spent as a
							hostage in Thebes, but later would not accept any gift from him;
							whereupon Philip said to him, Do not deprive me of
								my invincibility by letting me be outdone in benefactions and
								favours.

On a time when many prisoners had been taken, Philip was
							overseeing their sale, sitting with his tunic pulled up in an unseemly
							way. So one of the men who were being sold cried out, Spare me, Philip, for I am a friend of your
								father's. And when Philip askeds Where,
								sirrah, and how carne you to be such ? the man said, I wish to tell you privately, if I may come near
								you. And when he was brought forward, he
							said, Put your cloak a little lower, for you are
								exposing too much of yourself as you are sitting now. And Philip
							said, Let him go free, for it had escaped me that
								he is a truly loyal friend.

Once when he was on the march, and was invited to dinner by
							a man of the land, he took a good many persons with him; and when he saw
							that his host was much perturbed, since the preparations that had been
							made were inadequate, he sent word in advance to each of his friends ,
							and told them to leave room for cake. They
							took his advice and, expecting more to follow, did not eat much, and
							thus there was enough for all.

When Hipparchus of Euboea died, 
							it was plain that Philip took it much to heart; and when somebody
							remarked, But, as a matter of fact, his death has
								come in fullness of time, Philip said, Yes, in fullness of time for him, it is true, but swiftly for me,
								for he came to his end too soon to receive from me, as he ought,
								favours worthy of our friendship.

Learning that Alexander complained against him because he
							was having children by other women besides his wife, he said, Well then, if you have many competitors for the
								kingdom, prove yourself honourable and good, so that you may obtain
								the kingdom not because of me, but because of yourself. He bade
							Alexander give heed to Aristotle, and study philosophy, so that, as he said, you may not do a great many things of the sort that I am sorry to
								have done.

He appointed one of Antipater's friends to the position of
							judge, but later, on learning that the man dyed his beard and hair, he
							removed him, at the same 
							 time remarking that he did not believe that a
							man who was untrustworthy in the matter of hair was fit to be trusted in
								actions.

While he was hearing the case of Machaetas, he was near
							falling asleep, and did not give full attention to the rights of the
							case, but decided against Machaetas. And when Machaetas exclaimed that
							he appealed from the decision, Philip, thoroughly enraged, said, To whom ? And Machaetas replied, To you yourself, Your Majesty, if you will listen
								awake and attentive. At the time Philip merely ended the
							sitting, but when he had gained more control of himself and realized
							that Machaetas was treated unfairly, he did not reverse his decision,
							but satisfied the judgement with his own money.

When Harpalus, acting in behalf of his kinsman and intimate
							friend Crates, who was under condemnation for wrongdoing, proposed as a
							fair solution that Crates should pay the fine, but be absolved from the
							adverse judgement so that he should not be subject to reproach, Philip
							said, It is better that the man himself, rather
								than that we because of him, should be ill spoken of.

When his friends were indignant because the people of the
							Peloponnesus hissed him at the Olympic games, although they had been
							treated well, he said, Well, what if they should
								be treated ill!

Once on a campaign he slept for an unusually long time, and
							later, when he arose, he said, I slept safely, for
								Antipater was awake.

On another occasion when he was asleep in the daytime, and the Greeks who had gathered at his
							doors were indignant and complaining, Parmenio said, Do not be astonished that Philip is asleep now;
								for while you were asleep he was awake.

When he desired to correct a harp-player at dinner, and to
							discuss the playing of this instrument, the harp-player said, God forbid, Your Majesty, that you should ever
								fall so low as to have a better knowledge of these matters than
								I.

At a time when he was at odds with Olympias, his wife, and
							with his son, Demaratus of Corinth arrived, and Philip inquired of him
							how the Greeks were feeling towards one another. And Demaratus said, Much right have you to talk about the harmony of
								the Greeks when the dearest of your own household feel so towards
								you ! Philip, taking the thought to heart, ceased from his
							anger, and became reconciled with them.

When a poor old woman insisted that her case should be
							heard before him, and often caused him annoyance, he said he had no time
							to spare, whereupon she burst out, Then give up
								being king. Philip, amazed at her words, proceeded at once to
							hear not only her case but those of the others.

While Alexander was still a boy and Philip was winning many
							successes, he was not glad, but said to 
							 his playmates, My father
								will leave nothing for me to do. 
							 But, said the boys, he
								is acquiring all this for you. 
							 But what good is it, said Alexander, if I possess much and accomplish nothing ?

Being nimble and swift of foot, he was urged by his father
							to run in the foot-race at the Olympic games. Yes,
								I would run, said he, if I were to have
								kings as competitors.

A girl was brought to him late in the evening with the
							intent that she should spend the night with him, and he asked her, Why at this time ? She replied, I had to wait to get my husband to go to bed
							 ; whereupon Alexander bitterly rebuked his servants, since, owing to
							them, he had so narrowly escaped becoming an adulterer.

On a time when he was offering incense to the gods with
							lavish hand, and often taking up handfuls of the frankincense, Leonidas,
							who had been his attendant in boyhood, happening to be present, said, My boy, you may offer incense thus lavishly when
								you have made yourself master of the land that bears it. And so,
							when Alexander had become master of it, he sent a letter to Leonidas :
								 I have sent to you a half-ton of frankincense
								and cassia, so that you may never again count any petty cost in
								dealing with the gods, since you know that we are now masters of the
								land that bears these fragrant things.

Just before he fought the battle at Granicus he urged the
							Macedonians to eat without stint, and to bring out all they had, since
							on the morrow they should dine from the enemy's stores.

When Perillus, one of his friends, asked him for dowry for
							his girls, Alexander bade him accept ten thousand pounds. He said that
							two thousand would be enough; but Alexander said, Enough for you to accept, but not enough for me to give.

He bade his manager give to Anaxarchus, the philosopher, as
							much as he asked for; and when the manager said that he asked for twenty
							thousand pounds, Alexander said, He does well, for
								he knows that he has a friend who is both able and willing to make
								such presents.

When he saw in Miletus many statues of athletes who had won
							victories in the Olympic and the Pythian games, he said, Where were the men with bodies like these when
								the barbarians were besieging your city?

Ada, queen of the Carians, made it a point of honour to be
							always sending to him fancy dishes and sweetmeats prepared in unusual
							ways by the hands of artists and chefs, but he said he had better fancy
							cooks--his night marches for his breakfast, and for his dinner his
							frugal breakfast.

Once, when all preparations had been made for battle, his
							generals asked him whether there was anything else in addition to what
							they had done. Nothing, said he, except to shave the Macedonians' beards. And
							as Parmenio expressed his surprise, Alexander said, Don't you know that in battles there is nothing
								handier to grasp than a beard?

When Darius offered him two million pounds, and also
							offered to share Asia equally with him, Parmenio said, I would take it if I were Alexander. 
							 And so indeed would I, said Alexander, if I were Parmenio. But he made answer to
							Darius that the earth could not tolerate two suns, nor Asia two kings.

When he was about to risk everything at Arbela against a
							million men arrayed against him, his friends came to him and accused the
							soldiers of talking together and making agreements in their tents that
							they would hand over none of the spoil to the royal treasury, but would
							keep everything for themselves. And he smiling said, You bring good news; for I hear in this the talk
								of men prepared to conquer and not to flee. And many of the
							soldiers came to him and said, Be of good cheer,
								Sire, and do not fear the great numbers of the enemy; for they will
								not be able to stand the very smell of goat that clings to us.

As the army was being drawn up for battle, he saw one of
							the soldiers fitting the thong to his javelin, and he shoved him out of
							the line as a useless man who was making ready at this time when he
							ought to be using his weapons.

As he was reading a letter from his mother, which contained
							secret slanders against Antipater, Hephaestion, as usual, was reading it
							with him. Alexander did not prevent Hephaestion from reading it, but,
							when he had finished the reading, he took off his ring, and placed the
							seal on Hephaestion's lips.

In the shrine of Ammon he was hailed by the prophetic
							priest as the son of Zeus. That is nothing
								surprising, said he; for Zeus is by nature
								the father of all, and he makes the noblest his own.

When he was hit in the leg by an arrow, and many of those
							who were oftentimes wont to hail him as a god hurried up to him, he,
							relaxing his countenance, said, This is blood, as
								you see, and not Ichor, like that which
									flows from the wounds of the blessed Immortals.

When some commended the frugality of Antipater, who, they
							said, lived a plain and simple life, he remarked, Outwardly Antipater is plain white, but within he is all
								purple.

When one of his friends was entertaining him in the cold of
							winter, and brought in a small brazier with a little Are in it,
							Alexander bade him bring in either firewood or incense.

When Antipatrides brought to dinner a beautiful
							harp-player, Alexander, stirred to love at the sight of her, asked
							Antipatrides whether he happened to be at all in love with the girl; and
							when he admitted that he was, Alexander said, You
								abominable wretch ! Please take her away from here at once.

On another occasion Casander forced Python, beloved by
							Evius the flute-player, 
							to kiss him, and Alexander, seeing that Evius was vexed, leapt up in
							anger against Casander, exclaiming It isn't
								allowable even to fall in love with anybody, because of you and
								people like you.

When he was sending away to the sea those of the
							Macedonians who were sick or incapacitated, a man was reported to have
							put down his name in the list of the sick although there was nothing the
							matter with him. When therefore the man was brought before Alexander and
							examined, he admitted that he had employed this ruse because of love for
							Telesippa, who was departing for the sea; and Alexander asked, With whom must one talk concerning Telesippa
								? And when he learned that she was not a slave, he said, Then let us, Antigenes, try to persuade Telesippa
								to stay with us; for to coerce her, a free woman, is not within our
								right.

When Greek mercenaries serving on the enemy's side carne
							into his hands, he would order the Athenians among them to be kept in
							chains, because, while they could live at the expense of the State, they
							were serving as mercenaries, and so also the Thessalians, because,
							although they owned the very best land, they did not till it. But the
							Thebans he let go free, saying that these alone, because of us, have
							neither city nor land left to them.

When he had taken captive the man who had the greatest
							repute for marksmanship among the Indians, of whom it was said that he
							could send an arrow through a finger-ring, Alexander bade him show his
							skill, and when he would not, the king in anger decreed his execution.
							The man, as he was being led away, said to those who were taking him
							that he had not practised for many days, and was afraid of failing; and
							when this came to the ears of Alexander, he marvelled and let the man go
							with many gifts because he preferred to suffer
							himself to be put to death rather than to show himself unworthy of his
							reputation.

When Taxiles, king of the Indians, met Alexander, he
							charged him not to fight or make war, but, if he were inferior, to
							accept favours, and, if he were superior, to bestow them. To this
							Alexander replied that this was the very issue between them, to
							determine which could outdo the other in bestowing favours.

When he was told concerning the ' Birdless Rock,' as it is called, in India, that the place was extreme!v
							difficult to capture, but that the man who held it was a coward, he
							said, In that case it is easy to capture.

When another man who held a seemingly impregnable rock
							surrendered himself together with his stronghold to Alexander, Alexander
							bade him to continue to rule, and gave him additional country to govern,
							saying that this person seems to me to show sense
								in trusting himself to a good man rather than to a strong place.

After the capture of the rock his friends were saying that
							he had surpassed Heracles in his deeds, but he remarked, No, I do not feel that my deeds, with my position
								as commander, are to be weighed against one word of Heracles.

Learning that in gambling with dice some of his friends did
							not enter into the game as a sport, he punished them.

Of his foremost and most influential friends he seems to
							have honoured Crateras most and to have loved Hephaestion best. For, said he, Crateras
								is fond of the king, but Hephaestion is fond of Alexander.

He sent ten thousand pounds to Xenocrates the philosopher,
							but when Xenocrates would not accept them, and said he had no need of
							them, Alexander asked whether Xenocrates had not a single friend. For, in my case, said he, the wealth of Darius was hardly enough for my
								friends.

Porus, after the battle, was asked by Alexander, How shall I treat you ? 
							 Like a king, said he. Asked again if there
							were nothing else, he said, Everything is included
								in those words. Marvelling at his sagacity and manliness,
							Alexander added to his kingdom more land than he had possessed before.

Learning that he was being maligned by a certain man, he
							said, It is kingly to be ill spoken of for doing
								good.

As he was dying, he said, looking towards his companions,
								 I see that my funeral rites will be
								imposing.

When he had come to his end, Demades the orator said that
							the army of the Macedonians, because of its lack of leadership, looked
							like the Cyclops after his eye had been put out.

Ptolemy, son of Lagus, used, as a rule, to dine and sleep
							at his friends' houses; and if ever he gave a dinner, he would send for
							their dishes and linen and tables, and use them for the occasion. He
							himself owned no more than were required for everyday use; and he used
							to say that it was more kingly to enrich than to be rich.

Antigonus was persistent in his demands for money, and when
							somebody said, But Alexander was not like
								this, he replied, Very naturally; for he
								reaped Asia, and I am picking up the straws.

Seeing some of his soldiers playing ball in their
							breastplates and helmets, he was much pleased and sent for their
							officers, wishing to commend them. But when he heard that they were
							engaged in drinking, he gave their positions to their soldiers.

When all were astonished because, after he had grown old,
							he handled matters with mildness and gentleness, he said, Time was when I craved power, but now I crave
								repute and goodwill among men.

To his son Philip, who inquired in the presence of numerous persons, When
								are we going to break camp ? he said, What
								are you afraid of? That you alone may not hear the bugle ?

When the young man was determined to take up his quarters
							at the house of a widow who had three handsome daughters, he called the
							quartermaster and said, Will you not get my son
								out of his crowded quarters ? 
							 , Strategemata , iv. 1. 10.

He suffered a long illness, and when he had recovered his
							strength he said, 'Twas nothing so very bad; for
								the illness has reminded us not to feel too proud, since we are but
								mortal

When Hermodotus in his poems wrote of him as The Offspring of the Sun, he said, The slave who attends to my chamber-pot is not
								conscious of that!

When somebody remarked that all things are honourable and
							righteous for kings, he said, Yes indeed, for
								kings of the barbarians; but for me only the honourable things are
								honourable and the righteous righteous.

When Marsyas his brother had a lawsuit, and claimed the
							right to have the trial held at his house, Antigonus said, It shall be in the Forum and with everybody
								listening to see whether we do any injustice.

Once upon a time in the winter when he had forced a halt in
							regions lacking provisions, and some of the soldiers were cursing him,
							not knowing that he was near, he poked open his tent with his stick, and said, You'll be sorry
								if you don't go farther off to curse me.

When Aristodemus, one of his friends,
							who, it was whispered, was the son of a cook, advised him to curtail his
							expenditures and his giving of presents, he said, Aristodemus, your words have the stink of a kitchen apron.

When the Athenians admitted to citizenship a slave of his,
							held in much esteem, and enrolled him as a free man, he said, I could wish that one Athenian had not been
								flogged by me !

A young man, one of the pupils of Anaximenes the orator,
							pronounced before him a very carefully prepared oration, and he, wishing
							to gain some further information, asked a question. But when the young
							man relapsed into silence, he remarked, What is
								your answer ? Or Is this the content of the
									written page ?

Hearing another orator say that the season had been snowy
								 and so
							had caused a lack of herbage in the land, he said, Please stop treating me as you treat a common crowd.

When Thrasyllus the Cynic asked him for a shilling, he said
								 That is not a fit gift for a king to give. 
							And when Thrasyllus said, Then give me two hundred
								pounds, he retorted, But that is not a
								fit gift for a Cynic to receive.

When he sent Demetrius his son, with many ships and forces, to make the Greeks a free
							people, he said that his repute, kindled in Greece as on a lofty height,
							would spread like beacon-fires through out the inhabited world.

While Antagoras the poet was cooking a congereel, and was
							shaking the skillet with his own hand, Antigonus stepped up behind him
							and said, Antagoras, do you imagine that Homer
								cooked a conger while he was writing of the exploits of Agamemnon
								? To which Antagoras retorted. And do you,
								Your Majesty, believe that Agamemnon, while he was performing those
								exploits, was overmuch concerned if anybody in the army cooked a
								conger ?

In a dream he saw Mithradates reaping a golden harvest, and
							thereupon planned to kill him. He told Demetrius his son, and bound him
							by an oath to silence. But Demetrius took Mithridates to walk with him
							beside the sea, and with the butt of his spear wrote in the sand, Flee, Mithridates. And Mithridates,
							understanding the purport, fled to Pontus and reigned there until his
							end.

When Demetrius was besieging the Rhodians he seized in one of the suburbs a painting of the artist Protogenes in which he portrayed Ialysus.
							The Rhodians sent a herald to him and besought him to spare the
							painting. He replied that he would sooner destroy the statues and
							portraits of his father than that painting. And
							coming to terms with the Rhodians, he left his great siege-engine, the
							Citytaker, with them to serve as a token of his prowess and of their
							courage.

The Athenians revolted, and when he had taken their city,
							which was already in serious straits from lack of food, an assembly of
							the people was immediof grain. In speaking about this before them he lapsed into a
							barbarism. One of those sitting there repeated the phrase as it should
							have been spoken, and he said, For this
								correction, then, I give you eight thousand bushels more.

When Demetrius, the father of Antigonus the Second, had
							been taken captive, he sent one of his friends and urged Antigonus to
							pay no attention if he should write anything under compulsion of
							Seleucus, and not to withdraw from the cities; but Antigonus of his own
							accord wrote to Seleucus resigning to him his whole kingdom and offering
							to surrender himself as a hostage on condition that his father Demetrius
							be released.

When Antigonus was about to engage in a naval battle
							against Ptolemy's generals, the pilot said that the ships of the enemy
							far outnumbered their own. But, said
							Antigonus, how many ships do you think my own
								presence here is equivalent to ?

Once when he was withdrawing before the advance of the
							enemy, he said that he was not fleeing, but was following up his
							advantage, which lay in the rear.

When a young man, son of a brave father, but not himself
							having any reputation for being a good soldier, suggested the propriety
							of his receiving his father's emoluments, Antigonus said, My boy, I give pay and presents for the
								excellence of a man, not for the excellence of his father.

When Zeno of Citium died, whom he admired most among the
							philosophers, he said that the audience to hear of his exploits had been
							taken away.

Lysimachus was overpowered by Dromichaetas in Thrace, and
							because of thirst surrendered himself and his army ; and when he
							drank after he had been made a prisoner, he said, My God, for what a little pleasure have I made myself a slave from
								being a king !

To Philippides the comic poet who was his friend and
							intimate he said, What of mine shall I share with you ? And the other replied, What you will, except your secrets.

Antipater, hearing of the death of Parmenio at the hands of
							Alexander, said, If Parmenio plotted against
								Alexander, who is to be trusted ? And if he did not, what is to be
								done ?

Of Demades the orator, who had already become an old man,
							he said that he was like an animal which had been eaten at a sacrificial
							feast; there was left only the belly and the tongue.

Antiochus the Third wrote to the cities that, if he should
							write ordering anything to be done contrary to the laws, they should pay
							no attention, assuming that he had acted in ignorance.

Seeing the priestess of Artemis surpassingly beautiful in
							her appearance, he straightway marched forth from Ephesus, 
							for fear that even against his determination he might be constrained to
							commit some unholy act.

Antiochus who was nicknamed the Hawk was warring against
							his brother Seleucus for the kingdom. But when
							Seleucus, vanquished by the Galatians, could nowhere be found, but, to
							all appearances, had been cut down in battle,
							Antiochus laid aside his purple and assumed a dark robe. But after a
							little time, learning that his brother was safe and sound, he offered
							sacrifices to the gods to celebrate the good tidings, and made the
							people in the cities under him to wear garlands.

Eumenes, plotted against by Perseus, was reputed to be
							dead. When the story was brought to Pergamum, Attalus his brother put on
							the crown, married his wife, and assumed the rule. But upon learning
							that his brother was approaching alive, he went to meet him, attended,
							as was his wont, by his bodyguards, and holding a short spear. Eumenes
							greeted him kindly and whispered in his ear, 
								—ldquo;Haste not to marry ere you see him dead,—rdquo; 
							 and neither said nor did anything else during his whole
							lifetime to arouse suspicion, but when he died he left to Attalus his
							wife and his kingdom. As a requital, Attalus reared no child of his own,
							although many were born, but while still living he transferred the
							kingdom to Eumenes' son when the boy became of age.

The sons of Pyrrhus, when they were children asked their father to whom he intended to leave
							the kingdom; and he said, To that one of you who
								keeps his sword sharper.

Being asked whether Python or Caphisias were the better
							flute-player he said, Polysperchon is the better
								general.

When he was twice victorious in conflict with the Romans,
							but lost many of his friends and commanders, he said, If we are victorious over the Romans in one more
								battle, we are lost!

As he was sailing away from Sicily after his failure there,
								 he turned to look back, and said to his friends, What a field of conflict are we leaving behind
								us for the Romans and Carthaginians to wrestle in!

When the soldiers addressed him as ' Eagle,' he said, Why not an eagle, when I am borne aloft on the
								swift wings of your weapons ?

Hearing that some young men had made many defamatory
							remarks about him while in their cups, he ordered that they should all
							be brought before him the next day. When they were brought, he asked the
							first whether they had said these things about him. And the young man
							replied, Yes, Your Majesty; and we should have
								said more than that if we had had more wine.

Antiochus, who made his next campaign against the Parthians, in a
							hunt and chase wandered away from his friends and servants, and
							unrecognized entered the hut of some poor people. At dinner he brought
							in the subject of the king, and heard that, in general, he was a decent
							man, but that he entrusted most matters to friends who were scurvy
							fellows, and overlooked and often disregarded matters that were
							imperative through being too fond of hunting. At the time he said
							nothing; but at daybreak some of his bodyguards arrived at the hut, and
							his identity was disclosed when the purple and the crown were brought to
							him. Howbeit, said he, since the day when I donned you, yesterday was the first time that
								I heard true words about myself.

The Jews, when he was besieging Jerusalem, asked for an
							armistice of seven days for their most important festival, and he not
							only granted this, but he also made ready bulls with gilded horns, and a
							great quantity of incense and spices, and brought all these in solemn
							procession as far as the gates. Then, having transferred the offering to
							the hands of their priests, he returned to his camp. The Jews were
							amazed, and immediately after the festival placed themselves in his
								hands.

Themistocles while yet in his youth abandoned himself to
							wine and women. But after Miltiades, 
							commanding the Athenian army, had overcome the barbarians at Marathon,
							never again was it possible to encounter Themistocles misconducting
							himself. To those who expressed their amazement at the change in him, he
							said that the trophy of Miltiades does not allow
								me to sleep or to be indolent.

Being asked whether he would rather have been Achilles or
							Homer, he said, How about you yourself ? Would you
								rather be the victor at the Olympic games or the announcer of the
								victor ?

When Xerxes was descending upon Greece with his mighty
							armament, Themistocles was afraid of Epicydes the popular leader,
							unscrupulous and cowardly, lest possibly he might, by being elected
							general, bring about the ruin of the State; and so he bribed Epicydes to
							withdraw from his attempt to gain the command.

When Adeimantus lacked the courage to risk a naval battle,
							and said to Themistocles, who was exhorting and urging on the Greeks, Themistocles, in the games they always scourge
								the runners who start before the signal is given, Themistocles
							replied, Yes, Adeimantus, but they do not crown
								those who are left behind in the race.

When Eurybiades lifted his cane as though to strike him, he
							said, Strike but listen.

Unable to persuade Eurybiades to engage the enemy's ships
							in the narrows, he sent a secret message to the barbarian telling him
							not to be afraid of the Greeks, who were running away. And when the
							barbarian, by taking this advice, was vanquished in the battle because
							he fought where the Greeks had the advantage, Themistocles again sent a
							message to him, bidding him flee to the Hellespont by the speediest
							route, since the Greeks were minded to destroy the bridge. In this his
							purpose was, while saving the Greeks, to give the king the impression
							that he was saving him.

When the man from Seriphus said to him that it was not
							because of himself but because of his country that he was famous,
							Themistocles remarked, What you say is true
								enough; but if I were from Seriphus, I should not have become
								famous, nor would you if you were from Athens.

Antiphates, the handsome youth of whom Themistocles was
							enamoured, avoided him in the earlier days, and looked down upon him,
							but, after Themistocles had acquired great repute and power, kept coming
							to him and trying to flatter him. My boy, said
							Themistocles, it has taken time, but now we have
								both come to have sense.

To Simonides, who petitioned for a legal decision which was
							not just, he said that Simonides would not be a good poet if he sang out
							of tune, nor should he himself be a useful official if he gave a
							decision out of tune with the law.

Of his son, who was pert towards his mother, he said that
							the boy wielded more power than anybody else in Greece; for the
							Athenians ruled the Greeks, he himself ruled the Athenians, the boy's
							mother ruled himself, and the boy ruled the mother.

Of the suitors for his daughter's hand he esteemed the man
							of promise higher than the man of wealth, saying that he was looking for
							a man that was in need of money rather than for money that was in need
							of a man.

When he offered a plot of land for sale, he ordered the
							announcement to be made that it also had a good neighbour.

When the Athenians treated him with contumely, he said, Why do you grow tired of being well served many
								times by the same men ? He also likened himself to the
							plane-trees, beneath which men hasten when overtaken by a storm, but,
							when fair weather comes, they pluck the leaves as they pass by and break
							off the branches.

The Eretrians, he said humorously, were like cuttle-fish in
							having a sword but
							no heart.

After his banishment from Athens first, and later from
							Greece, he went to the Persian king, and, when he was bidden to speak,
							he said that speech is like rugs woven with patterns and figures; for
							speech, like the rugs, when it is extended, displays its figures, but,
							when it is rolled into a small compass, it
							conceals and spoils them.

He asked for time so that, when he should have learned the
							Persian tongue, he might conduct his interview through his own self and
							not through another.

Being held deserving of many gifts, and speedily becoming
							rich, he said
							to his sons, Boys, we should be ruined now if we
								had not been ruined before!

Myronides, conducting a campaign against the Boeotians,
							gave orders to the Athenians for an invasion of the enemy's territory.
							When the hour was near, and the captains said that not all were present
							as yet, he said, All are present that intend to
								fight. And, leading them into battle before their ardour had
							cooled, he won a victory over the enemy.

Aristeides the Just was always an independent in politics,
							and avoided political parties, on the ground that influence derived from
							friends encourages wrongdoing.

At one time when the Athenians had impetuously determined
							to vote on ostracism, an ignorant country fellow, holding his potsherd,
							approached him and bade him write on it the name of Aristeides. Why, said he, do you
								know Aristeides ? And when the man said
							that he did not know him, but was irritated at his being called ' the
							Just,' Aristeides said never a word more, but wrote the name on the
							potsherd, and gave it back to him.

He was hostile to Themistocles, and once, when he was sent as ambassador in his
							company, he said, Are you willing, Themistocles,
								that we should leave our hostility behind us at the boundaries ? And
								then, if it be agreeable, we will take it up again on our
								return.

When he had fixed the contributions that the Greeks were to
							pay, he returned poorer by exactly as much as he spent on his
								journey.

Aeschylus wrote referring to Amphiaraus, His wish is not to seem, but be, the best, 
								Reaping the deep-sown furrow of his mind In which all goodly
								counsels have their root. And as these words were spoken all
							looked towards Aristeides.

Whenever Pericles was about to take command of the army, as
							he was donning his general's cloak, he used to say to himself, Take care, Pericles; you 
								are about to command free-born men who are both Greeks and
								Athenians.

He bade the Athenians remove Aegina, that sore on the eye of the Piraeus.

To a friend who wanted him to bear false witness, which
							included also an oath, he answered that he was a friend as far as the
							altar.

On his death-bed he accounted himself happy in that no
							Athenian, because of him, had ever put on a black garment.

Alcibiades, while still a boy, was caught in a fast hold in
							a wrestling-school, and, not being able to get away, he bit the arm of
							the boy who had him down. The other boy said, You
								bite like a woman. 
							 No indeed, said Alcibiades, but like a lion.

He owned a very beautiful dog, for which he had paid two
							hundred and seventy-five pounds, and he cut off its tail, so that, as he said, the Athenians may tell this about me, and may not concern
								themselves too much with anything else.

Coming upon a schoolroom, he asked for a book of the Iliad,
							and when the teacher said that he had nothing
							of Homer's, Alcibiades hit him a blow with his fist and passed on.

He came to Pericles' door, and upon learning that Pericles
							was not at liberty, but was considering how to render his accounting to
							the Athenians, he said, Were it not better that he
								should consider how not to render it ?

Summoned from Sicily by the Athenians to be tried for his
							life, he went into hiding, saying that it is silly for a man under
							indictment to seek a way to get off when he can get away.

When somebody said, Don't you trust
								your fatherland to decide about you ? he replied, Not I; nor would I trust even my mother, lest in
								a moment of thoughtlessness she unwittingly cast a black ballot
								instead of a white one.

Hearing that sentence of death had been passed upon him and
							his companions, he said, Let us show them, then,
								that we are alive, and turning to the Spartan side he started
							the Decelean war against the Athenians.

Lamachus reprimanded one of his captains who had made a
							mistake, and when the man vowed he would never do it again, Lamachus
							said, In war there is no room for two
								mistakes.

Iphicrates, who was reputed to be the son of a shoemaker,
							was looked down upon. The first occasion on which he won repute was
							when, wounded himself, he picked up one of the enemy alive, armour and
							all, and bore him to his own trireme.

Encamping in a friendly and allied country, he threw up a
							palisade and dug a ditch with all care, and to the man who said, What have we to fear ? he replied that the
							worst words a general could utter were the familiar I never should have thought it.

As he was disposing his army for battle against the
							barbarians he said he feared that they did not know the name of
							Iphicrates with which he was wont to strike terror to the hearts of his
							other foes.

When he was put on trial for his life he said to the informer, What are you trying to do, fellow ? At a time
								when war is all around us, you are persuading the State to
								deliberate about me instead of with me.

In reply to Harmodius, descendant of the Harmodius of early
							days, who twitted him about his lowly birth, he said, My family history begins with me, but yours ends
								with you.

A certain speaker interrogated him in the Assembly: Who are you that you are so proud? Are you
								cavalryman or man-at-arms or archer or 
								targeteer ? 
							 None of these, he replied, but the one who understands how to direct all of
								them.

Timotheus was popularly thought to be a lucky general, and
							some who were jealous of him painted pictures of cities entering into a
							trap of their own accord while he was asleep. Whereupon Timotheus said, If I
								capture such cities as those while I am asleep, what do you think I
								shall do when I am awake ?

When one of the foolhardy generals was exhibiting to the Athenians
							a wound he had received, Timotheus said, But I was
								ashamed when, at the time I was commanding, you in Samos, a missile from a catapult fell near me.

When the prominent speakers brought forward Chares, and
							insisted that the general of the Athenians ought to be a man like him,
							Timotheus said, Not the general, but the man who
								carries the general's bedding!

Chabrias used to say that those men commanded an army best
							who best knew what the enemy were about.

When he was under indictment for treason along with
							Iphicrates, Iphicrates
							rebuked him because, while he was in jeopardy, he went to the gymnasium,
								 and spent the usual time at his luncheon.
							His answer was, You may go unwashed and unfed, and
								I may have had my luncheon and a bath and rub-down, but you may rest
								assured that, if the Athenians reach any adverse decision regarding
								us, they will put us both to death.

He was wont to say that an army of deer commanded by a lion
							is more to be feared than an army of lions commanded by a deer.

Hegesippus, nicknamed ' Topknot,' in a public address was inciting the Athenians
							against Philip, when someone in the Assembly commented audibly, You are bringing on war. 
							 Yes, by Heaven, I am, said he, and black clothes and public funerals and
								orations over the graves of the dead, if we intend to live as free
								men, and not to do what is enjoined upon us by the Macedonians.

Pytheas, while still young, came forward in the Assembly
							to oppose the resolutions proposed in honour of Alexander. When someone
							said, Have you the audacity, young as you are, to
								speak about such important matters ? he replied, As a matter of fact, Alexander, whom your
								resolutions declare to be a god, is younger than I am.

Phocion the Athenian was never seen by anyone to laugh or
							cry.

At a meeting of the Assembly someone said to him, You seem to be thinking, Phocion. 
							 You guessed right, said he, for I am thinking whether I can leave out any
								part of what I am going to say to the Athenians.

An oracle was given to the Athenians declaring that there
							was one man in the city opposed to the opinions of all, whereupon they
							ordered that search be made to find him, and were very vociferous. But
							Phocion said that the man was himself, for he was the only one who did
							not like a single thing of all that the multitude did and said.

Once, when he expressed an opinion before the people, he
							won acclaim, and saw that all alike accepted the view he had expressed,
							whereupon he turned to his friends and said- Does
								it not look as if I had unwittingly said something bad ?

When the Athenians were asking for contributions towards a
							public sacrifice and feast, and all the rest were contributing, he,
							being importuned to give, said, I should be
								ashamed to make a contribution to you and not make restitution to
								this man, and, as he said this, he pointed to a man who had lent
							him money.

Demosthenes, the orator, said to him, The Athenians will put you to death if they go mad. 
							 Yes, he replied, me if
								they go mad, but you if they keep their senses,

Aristogeiton, the informer, was about to be put to death in
							prison, sentence having been passed upon him, and he wanted Phocion to
							come to him; but Phocion's friends were averse to his going to see such
							a wicked man. And where, said he, could anyone converse with Aristogeiton with
								greater pleasure ?

The Athenians were enraged at the people of Byzantium
							because they had not received Chares in their city when he had been sent
							with a force to help them against Philip. But when Phocion said that
							they must not be enraged at those of their allies who distrusted, but at
							those of their own generals who were distrusted, he was himself chosen
							general; and he, being trusted by the people of Byzantium, made Philip
							withdraw without accomplishing his purpose.

When Alexander the king sent him twenty thousand pounds as
							a present, he asked those who brought the money why it was that, when
							there were so many Athenians, Alexander offered this to him only. They
							replied that their king considered him only to be upright and
							honourable. Then, said he, let him suffer me both to seem and to be
								such.

When Alexander made a demand for triremes, and the people
							called for Phocion by name to come forward and advise them, he arose and
							said, Well then, I advise you either to be
								conquerors yourselves by force of arms, or else to be the friends of
								the conquerors.

When word suddenly came, quite unauthenticated, of the
							death of Alexander, and the orators immediately
							leaped to the platform, already urgent that there be no delay, but war
							at once, Phocion insisted that they wait a while, and learn the facts.
								 For, said he, if
								Alexander is dead to-day, he will be dead to-morrow also, and the
								day after.

When Leosthenes plunged the State into war, elated as it
							was by brilliant hopes to aspire to the distinction of freedom and
							leadership, Phocion likened his words to the cypress - trees. For, said he, they are
								beautiful and tall, but they bear no fruit. However, the first
							attempts were successful, and, when the State was offering sacrifices to
							celebrate the good tidings, Phocion was asked whether he wished that
							these deeds had been done by himself. Yes, 
							said he, these deeds done, but that advice
								given.

When the Macedonians invaded Attica, and were devastating the land near the sea, he led out
							the men of military age. Soon many were thronging about him and strongly
							urging him to take possession of that hill over
								there, to draw up his forces here. 
							 Great Heavens, he said, how many generals do I see and how few soldiers ! Nevertheless,
							he engaged the enemy, and overcame them, and slew Micion the Macedonian
							commander.

After a little time the Athenians were overcome in the war,
							and compelled by Antipater to submit to receiving a garrison. Menyllus,
							the commander of the garrison, offered money to Phocion, who said with
							indignation that Menyllus was no whit better
							than Alexander, and the ground for his receiving money was not so good
							as before, since he had not accepted it then.

Antipater said that he had two good friends at Athens; and
							of the two he had never persuaded Phocion to accept a gift, nor ever
							sated Demades by giving.

When Antipater required as his right that Phocion do a
							certain act of unrighteousness, he said, Antipater, you cannot use Phocion as a friend and flatterer
								both. Repeated by Plutarch in Moralia , 64 C, 142 B, 533 A; Life of Phocion , chap. xxx. (755 B); Life of Agis , chap. ii. (795 E).

The death of Antipater was followed by a democratic
							government at Athens, and sentence of death was passed in Assembly on
							Phocion and his friends. The others were led away weeping, but Phocion
							was proceeding in silence when one of his enemies met him and spat in
							his face. He looked toward the officers and said, Will not somebody make this man stop his bad manners ?

When one of the men who were to die with him wept and
							cursed, he said, Are you not content, Thudippus,
								that you are to die with Phocion ?

When the cup of hemlock was already being handed to him, he
							was asked if he had any message for his son. I
								charge and exhort him, said he, not to
								cherish any ill feeling against the Athenians.

Peisistratus, the despot of the Athenians, on a time when
							some of his friends had revolted and taken possession of Phyle, came to
							them carrying a bundle of bedding. When they asked what he meant by
							this, he said, To persuade you and get you away
								from here, or, if I cannot persuade you, to stay with you; that is
								why I have come prepared.

It was whispered to him regarding his mother that she was
							in love with a certain young man, and had secret meetings with him, but
							that the young man was afraid and generally asked to be excused.
							Whereupon Peisistratus invited him to dinner, and after he had dined
							asked him, How was it ? And when the young
							man said, Very pleasant, Peisistratus said, You shall have this pleasure every day if you are
								agreeable to my mother.

When Thrasybulus, who was in love with the daughter of
							Peisistratus, kissed her one day on meeting her, Peisistratus, when
							incited by his wife against the man, said, If we
								hate them that love us, what shall we do to them that hate us ? 
							And thereupon he gave the maiden as wife to Thrasybulus.

Some revellers fell in with his wife, and did and said a
							good many ribald things. The next day when they besought Peisistratus
							with many tears, he said, As for you, do you try
								to conduct yourselves in a seemly manner hereafter, but as for my
								wife, she did not go out at all yesterday.

When he was bent on marrying a second wife, his children
							inquired whether he had any fault to find with them. By no means, he said, but only praise—and the desire to have
								other children like you.

Demetrius of Phalerum recommended to Ptolemy the king to
							buy and read the books dealing with the office of king and ruler. For, as he said, those
								things which the kings' friends are not bold enough to recommend to
								them are written in the books.

Lycurgus, the Spartan, introduced the custom among his
							citizens of wearing their hair long, saying that it made the beautiful
							more comely and the ugly more frightful.

To the man who urged him to create a democracy in the State
							his answer was, Do you first create a democracy in
								your own house.

He ordered that the people build their houses with saw and
							axe only; for he knew that men are ashamed to bring into simple houses
							costly vessels, rugs, and tables.

He prohibited boxing and prize-fighting so that the people
							might not even in sport get the habit of crying off.

He prohibited making war upon the same people many times,
							so that they should not make their opponents too belligerent. And it is
							a fact that years later, when Agesilaus was wounded, Antalcidas said of
							him that he was getting a beautiful return from the Thebans for the
							lessons he had taught them in habituating and teaching them to make war
							against their will.

Charillus the king, being asked why Lycurgus enacted so few
							laws, replied that people who used few words had no need of many laws.

When one of the helots conducted himself rather boldly
							towards him, he said, By Heaven, I would kill you
								if I were not angry.

In answer to the man who inquired why he and the rest wore
							their hair long, he said that of all ornaments this was the least
							expensive.

Teleclus the king answered his brother, who complained
							against the citizens because they conducted themselves with less
							consideration towards him than towards the king, by saying, The reason is that you do not know how to submit
								to injustice.

When Theopompus was in a certain city, a man pointed out
							the wall to him and inquired if it seemed to him to be beautiful and
							high, and he replied, It isn't a dwelling-place
								for women, is it ?

When the allies said in the Peloponnesian war it was only
							right that Archidamus set a limit to their contributions, he said, War does not feed on fixed rations.

Brasidas caught a mouse among some dry figs, and, getting
							bitten, let it go. Then, turning to those who were present, he said, There is nothing so small that it cannot save its
								life, if it has the courage to defend itself against those who would
								lay hand on it.

In a battle he was wounded by a spear which pierced his
							shield, and, pulling the weapon out of the wound, with this very spear
							he slew his foe. Asked how he got his wound, he said, 'Twas when my shield turned traitor.

When it came to pass that he fell while trying to win independence for the Greeks who were
							living within the borders of Thrace, and the envoys sent to Sparta
							approached his mother, her first question was whether Brasidas had died honourably. And
							when the Thracians spoke of him in the highest terms, and said that
							there would never be another like him, she said, Ye ken naught aboot it, being from abraid; for Brasidas was e'en a
								guid mon, but Sparta has mony a better mon than him.'

Agis the king said that the Spartans do not ask how many
							are the enemy, but where are they.

At Mantineia, when efforts were made to dissuade him from
							risking a battle with the enemy who outnumbered his own men, he said, He who would rule over many must fight with
								many.

When the Eleans were commended for conducting the Olympic
							games honourably, he said, What wonderful feat is
								it if they practise justice on one day in four years ? And when
							these same persons were persistent in their commendation, he said, What wonder if they practise honourably an
								honourable thing, that is, justice ?

To a base man, who asked him many times who was the best of
							the Spartans, he replied, The one most unlike
								you.

When another man inquired about the number of the Spartans, he said, Enough to keep away all bad men.

When another asked the same question, he said, You will think they are many, if you see them
								fight.

When Dionysius, the despot, sent garments of a very costly
							kind for Lysander's daughters, Lysander would not accept them, saying
							that he was afraid that the girls would appear more ugly because of
							them. ,

To those who found fault with him for accomplishing most
							things through deception (a procedure which they asserted was unworthy
							of Heracles) he used to say in reply that where the lion's skin does not
							reach it must be pieced out with the skin of the fox.

When the Argives seemed to make out a better case than the
							Spartans about the territory in dispute, he drew his sword, and said to
							them, He who is master of this talks best about
								boundaries of land.

Seeing that the Spartans were reluctant to carry on the
							battle against the walls of the Corinthians, he said, as he saw a hare
							leap out of the moat, Are you afraid of such
								enemies as these, in whose walls hares go to sleep because of the
								men's inaction ?

When a man from Megara used frank speech towards him in the general council, he said, Your words need a country to back them.

Agesilaus used to say that the inhabitants of Asia Minor
							were poor freemen, but good slaves.

Regarding their custom of calling the king of the Persians
							the Great King, he said, In what respect is he
								greater than I, unless he is more upright and self-restrained ?

When he was questioned about bravery and uprightness and
							asked which was the better, he said, We have no
								need of bravery if we are all upright.

When he was about to break camp in haste by night to leave
							the enemy's country, and saw his favourite youth, owing to illness,
							being left behind all in tears, he said, It is
								hard to be merciful and sensible at the same time.

Menecrates the physician, who was addressed by the title of
							' Zeus,' wrote in a letter to him : Menecrates
								Zeus to King Agesilaus, health and happiness. Agesilaus wrote in
							reply : King Agesilaus to Menecrates, health and
								sanity!

The Spartans won a victory over the Athenians and their
							allies at Corinth, and when he learned the number of
							the enemy 's dead he exclaimed, Alas for Greece
								which by her ain hands has destroyed so mony men, in number eneuch
								to conquer all the barbarians !

He received an oracle from Zeus at Olympia such as he
							wished, and thereupon the Ephors commanded him to ask the Pythian god
								 about the same matter. So, when he arrived at
							Delphi, he asked the god if his opinion was the same as his father's.

In interceding with Hidrieus of Caria for one of his
							friends he wrote : If Nicias has done no wrong,
								let him go free; if he has done wrong, let him go as a favour to me;
								but let him go anyway.

Being urged to hear a man who gave an imitation of the
							nightingale's voice, he said, I hae heard the bird
								itsel' mony a time.

After the battle of Leuctra, since the law decrees that all
							who run away in battle shall lose their citizenship, and the Ephors saw
							that the State was destitute of men, they, wishing to abrogate this
							penalty, invested Agesilaus with authority to revise the laws. He came
							forward into their midst, and ordered that beginning with the morrow all
							laws should be in full force.

He was sent as an ally to the king of the Egyptians, and
							was shut up in camp, together with the king, besieged by hostile forces
							which many times outnumbered their own. As the enemy were digging a
							ditch around the encampment, the king urged a sally and a decisive
							battle, but Agesilaus refused to hinder the enemy in their desire to put
							themselves on an equal footing with the defending force. When the ends
							of the ditch almost met, he drew up his men at this gap, and contending
							with equal numbers against equal numbers won a victory.

When he was dying he gave orders that his friends have no
							plaster or paint ' used, for this was the way he spoke of statues and
							portraits. For, said he, if I have done any noble deed, that is my
								memorial; but if none, then not all the statues in the world
								avail.

Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, on seeing the missile
							shot by a catapult, which had been brought then for the first time from
							Sicily, cried out, Great Heavens ! Man's valour is
								no more !

The Younger Agis, referring to the assertion of Demades
							that jugglers use the Spartan swords for 
							swallowing because of their small size, said, But
								it is a fact that the Spartans, above all men, reach their enemies
								with their swords.

When the Ephors ordered him to turn over soldiers to a
							traitor to lead, he said that he did not entrust another's men to the
							man that betrayed his own.

Somebody promised to give to Cleomenes cocks that would
							die fighting, but he retorted, No, don't, but give
								me those that kill fighting.

When Paedaretus was not chosen to be one of the three
							hundred, an honour which ranked highest in
							the State, he departed, cheerful and smiling, with the remark that he
							was glad if the State possessed three hundred citizens better than
							himself.

When Damonidas was assigned to the last place in the
							chorus by the director, he said, Good ! You have
								discovered a way by which even this place may come to be held in
								honour.

Nicostratus, the general of the Argives, was urged by Archidamus to
							betray a certain stronghold, his reward to be a large sum of money and
							marriage with any Spartan woman he wished, save only the royal family;
							but his reply was that Archidamus was not descended from Heracles, for
							Heracles, as he went about, punished the bad men, but Archidamus made
							the good men bad.

Eudamidas, seeing Xenocrates, already well on in years,
							discussing philosophy with his pupils in the Academy, and being informed
							that he was seeking after virtue, said, And when
								will he make use of it?

At another time, after he had listened to a philosopher who
							argued that the wise man is the only good general, he said, The speech is admirable, but the speaker has
								never been amid the blare of trumpets.

Antiochus, when he was an ephor, heard that Philip had
							given to the Messenians their land, whereupon he asked whether Philip
							had also given them the power to prevail in fighting to keep it.

Antalcidas, retorting to the Athenian who called the
							Spartans unlearned, said, At any rate, we alone have learned no evil from you
								Athenians.

When another Athenian said to him, You cannot deny that we have many a time put you to rout from the
								Cephisus, he said, But we have never put
								you to rout from the Eurotas !

When a lecturer was about to read a laudatory essay on
							Heracles, he said, Why, who says anything against
								him ?

While Epameinondas the Theban was general, panic never fell
							upon his troops.

He used to say that the most beautiful death was death in
							war.

He used to declare that the heavy-armed soldier ought to
							have his body trained not only by athletic exercises but by military
							drill as well. For
							this reason he always showed a repugnance towards fat men, and one such
							man he expelled from the army, saying that three or four shields would
							scarce serve to protect his belly, because of which he could not see a
							thing below it.

He was so frugal in his manner of living that once, when he
							was invited to dinner by a neighbour, and found there an elaborate
							display of cake and pastry and other dishes,
							and perfumes as well, he left at once, saying, I
								thought this was to be a meal and not a display of arrogance.

When the cook rendered his accounts to Epameinondas and his
							fellow-officers of the expenses for several days, Epameinondas showed
							indignation only at the great amount of olive oil. As his fellowofficers
							expressed their surprise, he said it was not the matter of expense that
							worried him, but that he had taken into his body so much oil.

While the city was keeping holiday, and all were busy with
							drinking and social enjoyment, Epameinondas, as he was walking along
							unwashed and absorbed in thought, met one of his intimate friends, who
							inquired in surprise why it was that he alone was going about in that
							state. So that all of you, said he, may get drunk and have a holiday.

A worthless fellow, who was guilty of one of the minor
							offences, he would not let off at the request of Pelopidas, but, when
							the man's mistress pleaded for him, he let him off, saying that such
							favours may properly be received by strumpets, but not by generals.

When the Spartans threatened an invasion, and oracles were
							reported to the Thebans, of which some told of defeat and others of
							victory, he ordered that these be placed at the right of the speakers'
							platform, and those at the left. When they had all been so placed, he
							arose and said, If you are willing to obey your
								officers, and come to close quarters with the enemy, these are the
								oracles for you, and he pointed to those of good omen; but if you are going to play the cowards in the
								face of danger, then those, and he glanced at those of ill omen.

On another occasion, when he was leading his troops against
							the enemy, there came a thunderstroke, and, when those about him
							inquired what he thought the god meant to signify by this, he replied,
								 That the enemy have been thunder-struck out of
								all sense because, when such places as those are near at hand, they
								pitch their camp in places such as these.

He used to say that of all the fair and goodly fortune that
							had fallen to his lot the thing that gave him the greatest gratification
							was that his victory over the Spartans at Leuctra came while his father
							and mother were still living.

It was his habit to appear at all times with a well-groomed
							body and a cheerful countenance, but on the day after that battle he
							went forth unwashed and with a look of dejection. When his friends asked
							if anything distressing had befallen him, he said, Nothing; but yesterday I found myself feeling a pride greater than
								is well. Therefore to-day I am chastising my immoderate indulgence
								in rejoicing.

Knowing that the Spartans were wont to conceal such
							calamities as this, and wishing to bring out clearly the magnitude of
							their disaster, he did not grant them leave to remove their dead all
							together, but separately by cities, so that it was seen that the Spartan
							dead numbered over a thousand.

When Jason, monarch of Thessaly, arrived at Thebes as an
							ally, he sent two thousand pieces of gold to Epameinondas, who was then
							sadly in want. Epameinondas did not take the money, but with a steadfast look at Jason said, You are beginning wrong. Then he borrowed a
							couple of pounds from one of his fellow-citizens to meet his personal
							expenses in the campaign, and invaded the Peloponnesus.

On a later occasion, when the king of the Persians sent
							twenty-five thousand pounds to him, he assailed Diomedon bitterly
							because he had made such a long voyage to corrupt Epameinondas; and he
							bade him say to the king that if the king should hold views conducive to
							the good of the Thebans, he should have Epameinondas as his friend for
							nothing; but if the reverse, then as his enemy.

When the Argives entered the Theban alliance, ambassadors of the Athenians arrived at Arcadia and
							accused both nations; and when Callistratus, the chief speaker, held up
							Orestes and Oedipus as a reproach to their respective cities,
							Epameinondas, rising to reply, said, We admit that
								we have had a parricide among us, and the Argives a matricide; but
								we expelled from our land those who did these deeds, and the
								Athenians received them ί

When the Spartans accused the Thebans of a long list of
							serious offences, he retorted, These Thebans,
								however, have put a stop to your brevity of speech !

When the Athenians took as a friend Alexander, the despot
							of Pherae, who was an enemy of the Thebans, and he promised to supply
							the Athenians with meat to be sold at a penny a pound, Epameinondas
							said, But we will supply them with wood to cook their meat for nothing; for we
								will cut down everything in their land, if they make any
								trouble.

The Boeotians, relaxed by leisure, he was always desirous
							of keeping continually under arms, and whenever he was chosen Governor
							of Boeotia he used to urge his advice upon the people, saying, Bethink yourselves once more, men, for, if I am
								general, you will have to serve in my army. And he used to call
							their country, which was flat and exposed, ' the dancing-floor of War,'
								 intimating that they could not hold their power over
							it if they did not keep a grip on the handles of their shields.

Chabrias, in the vicinity of Corinth, having struck down
							some few Thebans whose eagerness led them to carry the fighting to the
							foot of the walls, set up a trophy. 
							Epameinondas, ridiculing it, said, In that place
								should stand, not a trophy, but a Hecate ; for it was in keeping
							to set up an image of Hecate, as they used to do, at the meeting of
							three ways in front of the gates.

When somebody reported that the Athenians had sent an army,
							decked out with novel equipment, into the Peloponnesus, he said, Why should Antigenidas cry if Tellen has a new
								flute or two ? (Tellen was the worst of flute-players, and
							Antigenidas the best. )

Learning that his shield-bearer had received a great deal
							of money from a man who had been taken captive
							in the war, he said to him, Give me back my
								shield, and buy yourself a tavern in which to spend the rest of your
								days; for you will no longer be willing to face danger as before,
								now that you have become one of the rich and prosperous.

Being asked whether he regarded himself or Chabrias or
							Iphicrates as the better general, he said, It is
								hard to decide while we are alive.

Upon his return from Laconia he was put on trial for his
							life, together with his fellow-generals, for having added, contrary to
							the law, four months to his term of office as Governor of Boeotia. He bade his
							fellow-officers to put the responsibility on him, as if their action had
							been dictated by him, and said that he himself had not any words to
							speak better than his deeds; but if he absolutely must make a statement
							to the judges, he required from them as his just due, if they put him to
							death, to inscribe their sentence upon his tombstone, so that the Greeks
							might know that Epameinondas had compelled the Thebans against their
							will to lay waste Laconia with fire and sword, which for five hundred
							years had been unravaged;
							and that he had repopulated Messene after a space of two hundred and
							thirty years, and had organized the Arcadians and united them in a
							league, and had restored selfgovernment to the Greeks. As a matter of
							fact, all these things had been accomplished in that campaign. Thereupon the judges left the court-room with
							hearty laughter, and did not even take up their ballots to cast against
							him.

When in his last battle 
							he had been wounded and carried into a tent, he called for Daiphantus,
							and next after him for Iolai'das, and, learning that the men were dead,
							he bade the Thebans to make terms with the enemy, since no general was
							left to them. And the facts bore out his words, for he best knew his
							fellow-citizens.

Pelopidas, the associate of Epameinondas in command, in
							reply to his friends who told him that he was neglecting a very
							necessary business, the amassing of money, said, Yes, on my word, money is necessary—for Nicodemus here ! 
							 as he pointed to a lame and crippled man.

As he was leaving home for the field of battle, his wife
							begged him to have a care for his life. This
								advice, said he, should be kept for
								others, but for a commander and general the advice should be to have
								a care for the lives of the citizens.

When one of his soldiers said, We
								have fallen among the enemy, he said, Why
								any more than they among us ?

When he fell a victim to the treachery of Alexander, despot
							of Pherae, and was put in bonds, he upbraided Alexander; and when the
							despot said, Are you so eager to die, he
							replied, Yes, I certainly am, so that the Thebans
								may become the more exasperated, and you may get your deserts the
								sooner.

Thebe, the despot's wife, carne to Pelopidas and said that
							she was amazed because he was so cheerful in his bonds. Pelopidas
							replied that he was even more amazed at her because she without being in
							bonds could abide Alexander.

After Epameinondas had obtained his general's release,
							Pelopidas said that he felt grateful to Alexander; for by actual test he
							had now found himself more than ever to be of good courage not only in
							facing war but also in facing death. SAYINGS OF
							ROMANS

When some complained against Manius Curius because he
							apportioned to each man but a small part of the land taken from the
							enemy, and made the most of it public land, he prayed that there might
							never be a Roman who would regard as small the land that gave him enough
							to live on.

When the Samnites came to him after their defeat and
							offered him money, he happened to be cooking turnips in pots. He made
							answer to the Samnites that he had no need of money when he could make
							his dinner from this sort of food; and for him it was better than having
							money to hold sway over those who had it.

Gaius Fabricius, upon learning of the defeat of the Romans by Pyrrhus, said, Pyrrhus has defeated Laevinus, but the Epirotes
								have not defeated the Romans.

When he carne to see Pyrrhus about ransoming the prisoners
							of war, Pyrrhus offered him much money, but he would not accept it. On
							the following day Pyrrhus made ready his biggest elephant,all unknown to
							Fabricius, to appear and trumpet suddenly behind his back; and when this
							plan had been carried out, Fabricius turned and said with a smile, Neither your money yesterday nor your beast
								to-day has astounded me.

Pyrrhus urged Fabricius to stay with him and be the second
							in command, but Fabricius said, But there is no
								advantage in this for you; for, if the Epirotes come to know us
								both, they will prefer to be ruled by me rather than by you.

When Fabricius was consul, Pyrrhus's
							physician sent a letter to him, offering, if he should give thi word, to
							kill Pyrrhus by poison. Fabricius sent the letter to Pyrrhus, bidding
							him note the reason why he was the worst possible judge both of friends
							and of foes.

Pyrrhus, having thus discovered the plot, caused his
							physician to be hanged, and gave back the prisoners of war to Fabricius
							without ransom. Fabricius, however, would not accept them as a gift, but
							gave an equal number in return, lest he should give the impression that
							he was getting a reward. For, as he said, it was not to win favour with Pyrrhus that he had disclosed the plot, but
								that the Romans might not have the repute of killing through
								treachery, as if they could not win an open victory .

Fabius Maximus wished to avoid a battle with Hannibal, but,
							in time, to wear out his force, which was in need of both money and
							food; and so he followed close after him, taking a parallel route,
							through rough and mountainous places. When most people laughed at him,
							and called him a slave in attendance on Hannibal, he paid little
							attention, and continued to follow his own counsels. To his friends he
							said that he thought the man who feared gibes and jeers was more of a
							coward than the one who ran away from the enemy.

When his colleague in command, Minucius, laid low some of
							the enemy, and there was much talk of him as a man worthy of Rome,
							Fabius said that he felt more afraid over Minucius's good luck than over
							any bad luck he might have. And not long after, Minucius fell into an
							ambush and was in great danger of being destroyed together with his
							forces, when Fabius carne to his aid, slew many of the enemy, and
							rescued him. Whereupon Hannibal said to his friends, Did I not often prophesy to you regarding that
								cloud upon the mountains, that some day it would let loose a storm
								upon us ?

After the misfortune which befell the State at Cannae
								 he was chosen consul with Claudius Mar cellus, a man possessed of daring and spoiling
							for a figbt with Hannibal. Fabius hoped, if nobody fought with Hannibal,
							that Hannibal's forces, being under continual strain, would soon give
							out. Wherefore Hannibal said that he had more to fear from Fabius who
							would not fight than from Marcellus who would.

A certain Lucanian soldier was accused of wandering often
							from the camp at night for love of a young woman. Fabius, on hearing the
							accusation, ascertained that in other respects the man was an admirable
							man-at-arms, and he ordered that they secretly seize the man's mistress
							and bring her to him. When she was brought, he sent for the man, and
							said to him, Your being away at night, contrary to
								the regulations, has not passed unnoticed, nor, on the other hand,
								your good service in the past. Therefore let your oifences be atoned
								for by your brave and manly deeds, and in future you will be with
								us, for I have a surety. And leading forward the girl he
							presented her to him.

Hannibal kept the Tarentines in subjection by a
							garrison-all the city except the acropolis. Fabius drew him away a very
							long distance by a trick, and captured and sacked the city. When his
							secretary asked him what decision he had reached in regard to the sacred
							images, he said, Let us leave behind for the
								Tarentines their angered gods.

Marcus Livius, who had all the time held the acropolis with
							his garrison, said that it was because of him that the city had been
							taken. The others laughed at him, but Fabius said, You are quite right; for, if you had not
								lost the city, I should not have recaptured it.

When he was already an elderly man, his son was consul, and
							was attending to the duties of his office in public in the presence of a
							large number of people. Fabius, mounted, was advancing on horseback.
							When the young man sent a lictor, and ordered his father to dismount,
							the others were thrown into consternation, but Fabius, leaping from his
							horse, ran up more nimbly than his years warranted, and, embracing his
							son, said, Well done, my boy; you show sense in
								that you realize whose official you are, and what a high office you
								have taken upon you.

Scipio the Elder used to spend on literature all the
							leisure he could win from his military and political duties, and he used
							to say that he was busiest whenever he had nothing to do.

When he captured Carthage by
							assault, some of his soldiers, having taken captive a comely maiden,
							came to him with her, and offered to give her to him. I would gladly take her, said he, if I were a private and not a commander.

While he was besieging the city of Baria, in which
							was visible a temple of Venus overtopping all else, he ordered that in
							giving sureties for appearance they should specify that place, since he
							purposed two days hence to hear litigants in this temple of Venus. And
							so he did, as he had foretold, after the city had been taken.

When somebody inquired in Sicily on what he placed his
							reliance in purposing to take his army across to Carthage, he pointed
							out to the inquirer three hundred men in armour, who were drilling, and also a
							lofty tower which overlooked the sea. There is not
								one of these men, said he, who would not
								go up to the top of that tower and throw himself down head first at
								my command.

When he had crossed over, and was master of the land, and
							had burned the enemy's camps, the Carthaginians sent to him and made a
							treaty of peace, agreeing to surrender their elephants and ships, and to
							pay an indemnity. But when Hannibal had sailed back from Italy,
							they were sorry because of their agreement, since they did not now feel
							afraid. Scipio, learning this, said that, not even if they wished it,
							would he keep the compact unless they paid a million pounds more,
							because they had sent for Hannibal.

When the Carthaginians had been utterly overthrown, they
							sent envoys to him to negotiate a treaty of peace, but he ordered those
							who had come to go away at once, refusing to listen to them before they brought Lucius Terentius. This Terentius
							was a Roman, a man of good talents, who had been taken prisoner by the
							Carthaginians. And when they came bringing the man, Scipio seated him on
							the tribune next to himself in the conference, and, this done, he took
							up the negotiations with the Carthaginians, and terminated the war.

Terentius marched behind him in the triumphal procession,
							wearing a felt cap just like an emancipated slave. And when Scipio died, Terentius provided
							wine with honey for all who attended the funeral to drink their fill,
							and did everything else connected with his burial on a grand scale. But
							this, of course, was later.

Antiochus the king, 
							after the Romans had crossed over to attack him, sent to
							Scipio to ask about terms of peace. This should
								have been done before, said Scipio, but
								not now, when you have taken the bit and the rider is in the
								saddle.

The Senate voted that he should receive a sum of money from
							the treasury, but the treasurers were not willing to open it on that
							day; whereupon he said that he would open it himself, for the reason it
							was kept closed, he declared, was because he had fdled it with so much
							money.

When Petillius and Quintus brought before the people many
							accusations against him, he remarked that on this very day he had
							conquered the Carthaginians and Hannibal, and he said that he himself,
							with a garland on, was on his way up to the Capitol to offer sacrifice,
							and he bade anyone who so wished to give in his
							vote about him. With these words he went his way, and the people
							followed after, leaving behind his accusers still speaking.

Titus Quintius, from the very first, was a man of such
							conspicuous talent that he was chosen consul without having been
							tribune, praetor, or aedile. He was sent in command of the army against Philip, and
							was prevailed upon to meet him in conference. Philip insisted that he
							ought to receive some Romans as a guarantee of his safety, since
							Quintius was accompanied by many of his countrymen and he all alone
							represented the Macedonians. The truth is, 
							said Quintius, that it is you who have made
								yourself all alone by putting to death your friends and kindred.

Having vanquished Philip in battle, he proclaimed at the Isthmian games that henceforth he
							left the Greeks free and independent. Whereupon, all the Romans who had been
							taken captive in the days of Hannibal and were the slaves of Greek
							masters the Greeks purchased from their owners at twenty pounds for each
							man, and gave them as a present to Quintius; and these followed him in
							his triumphal procession wearing felt caps on their heads as is the
							custom for slaves that have been emancipated.

When the Achaeans were minded to send an army against the
							island of the Zacynthians, he bade them beware lest, if they extended
							their head, tortoise-like, outside of the Peloponnesus they should find
							themselves in danger.

When Antiochus the king, with a great force, arrived in
							Greece, and all were terror-stricken at the great numbers of the men and
							their armament, Flamininus told a story for the benefit of the Achaeans
							as follows : He said he was in Chalcis dining with a friend, and was
							amazed at the great number of the meats served. But his friend said that
							these were all pork, differing only in their seasoning and the way they
							were cooked. So then, he said, do not you, either, be amazed at the king's
								forces when you hear the names : 4 pikemen,' ' panoplied,' '
								foot-guards,' archers with two horses.' For all these are but
								Syrians differing from one another only in their paraphernalia.

He made a joke at the expense of Philopoemen, general of
							the Achaeans, who had plenty of horsemen and men-at-arms, but was not
							well off for money; Quintius said that Philopoemen had arms and legs but
							no belly. As a matter of fact, Philopoemen, in physical appearance, was
							something like this.

Gnaeus Domitius, whom Scipio the Great appointed in his
							stead as a colleague for his brother Lucius in the war against
							Antiochus, when he had inspected the battle-line of the enemy, and the
							officers of his staff urged him to attack at
							once, said that there was not time enough to hew down so many thousands,
							plunder their baggage, return to camp, and enjoy their usual comforts;
							but all this they would do on the morrow at the right time. And on the
							next day he engaged the enemy, and slew fifty thousand of them.

Publius Licinius, consul in command of the army, was
							defeated by Perseus, king of the Macedonians, in a cavalry battle, with
							the loss of two thousand eight hundred men killed or captured. After the
							battle, when Perseus sent envoys regarding a treaty of peace, the
							vanquished bade the victor submit his case to the Romans.

Paulus Aemilius, when he was a candidate for a second term
							as consul, failed of election. But when the war against Perseus and the
							Macedonians dragged on because of the inexperience and effeminacy of the
							generals, the people appointed him consul. But he said he owed no thanks
							to them; for it was not because he wanted office, but because they
							wanted an officer, that he was chosen general.

Coming home from the Forum and finding Tertia, his little
							daughter, in tears, he asked the reason. And she said, Our Perseus is dead. (It was a pet dog which had that name.) Good luck be with me, my girl, said he; I accept the omen.

Finding at camp much boldness and talk on the part of
							would-be generals and meddlers, he told them to keep quiet, and only
							sharpen their swords, and he would attend to everything else.

He gave orders that the sentinels at night should stand
							guard without spear or sword, so that, with no hope of defending
							themselves against the enemy, they might better contend against sleep.

Having invaded Macedonia by way of the mountains, and
							seeing the enemy standing in battle array, he said, in answer to
							Nasica's urgings to attack at once, Oh yes, if I
								were of your age; but much experience forbids me to fight,
								immediately after a march, against an army standing in battle
								array.

Having vanquished Perseus, he said, as he was carrying out
							the entertainments to celebrate the victory, that it was a part of the
							same proficiency to provide an army most terrifying to an enemy and a
							party most agreeable to friends.

Perseus, having been made a prisoner, indignantly spurned
							the thought of being made a part of his victor's triumph. That rests with you, said Aemilius, thereby
							giving him leave to make away with himself.

Of the unlimited treasure which was found he took nothing
							himself, but to his son-in-law Tubero he gave a silver goblet of five pounds weight in
							recognition of his supreme valour. And this, they say, is the first
							silver heirloom that ever found its way into the Aelian house.

Of the four male children that were born to him, two he
							happened to have given to others for adoption. Of the two that were at home one died five days
							before his triumph, at the age of fourteen, and the other five days
							after the triumph, at the age of twelve. When he went forth, and the
							people expressed their compassion and sympathy, he said that now he had
							no fears or misgivings about his country, since Fortune had thrust upon
							his house the retribution due for all their good fortune, and he had
							received this in behalf of all.

The Elder Cato, in assailing the profligacy and
							extravagance rife among the people, said that it was hard to talk to a
							belly which had no ears.

He said he wondered how a city could continue to exist
							unscathed in which a fish sold for more than an ox !

In bitter criticism of the prevalent domination of women,
							he said, All mankind rules its women, and we rule all mankind, but our women rule
								us.

He said that he preferred to receive no thanks when he had
							done a favour rather than to suffer no punishment when he had done a
							wrong, and that he always granted pardon to all who erred, with the
							single exception of himself.

In trying to stimulate the officials to administer sharp
							rebuke to the erring, he used to say that, if those who have the power
							to discourage crime do not discourage it, then they encourage it.

He said that it gave him more joy to see those of the youth
							that blushed than those that blanched.

He said that he hated a soldier who plied his hands in
							marching and his feet in fighting, and whose snore was louder than his
							battle-cry.

He said that the worst ruler is one who cannot rule
							himself.

He thought it especially necessary for every man to respect
							himself, since no man is ever separated from himself.

Seeing that statues were being set up in honour of many
							men, he said, As for myself, I had rather that
								men should ask why there is not a statue of Cato than why there
								is.

He charged those in power to be sparing of their authority,
							so that authority might continue always to be theirs.

He used to say that those who rob virtue of honour rob
							youth of virtue.

An official or a judge, he said, ought neither to require
							importuning to grant what is right nor to yield to importuning to grant
							what is wrong.

Wrongdoing, he used to say, even if it brings no risk to
							its authors, brings risk to all.

He used to say that, since there are so many odious things
							connected with old age, it is only right not to add the odium which
							comes from vice.

He had an idea that the man who has lost his temper differs
							from him who has lost his mind only in duration of time.

He said that those who use their good fortune reasonably
							and moderately are least envied ; for people envy not us but our
							surroundings.

He used to say that those who are serious in ridiculous
							matters will be ridiculous in serious matters.

He used to say that it is necessary to make good deeds
							secure by means of good deeds, so that they may not fall off in their
							repute.

He used to rebuke the citizens for electing always the same
							men to office. For, said he, you will give the impression that you hold office
								to be of no great worth, or else that you hold not many men to be
								worthy of office.

He pretended to be amazed at the man who had sold his lands
							bordering on the sea as being himself stronger than the sea. For, said he, what the
								sea only laps, this man has easily drunk up.

When he was a candidate for the censorship, and saw the
							other candidates soliciting the populace and flattering them, he himself
							cried out that the 
							 people had need of a stern physician and a
							thorough cleansing; they must choose not the most agreeable but the most
							inexorable man. As a result of his words he was the first choice of the
							electors.

In instructing the young men to fight boldly, he said that
							ofttimes talk is better than the sword and the voice better than the
							hand to rout and bewilder the enemy.

When he was waging war against the peoples living by the
							river Baetis, he was put in great peril by the vast
							numbers of the enemy. The Celtiberians were ready and willing to come to
							his aid for forty thousand pounds, but the other Romans were against
							agreeing to pay barbarian men. Cato said they were all wrong; for if
							they were victorious, the payment would come not from themselves, but
							from the enemy; and if they were vanquished there would be no debtors
							and no creditors.

He captured cities more in number, as he says, than the
							days he spent among the enemy, yet he himself took nothing from the
							enemy's country beyond what he ate and drank.

He distributed to each soldier a pound of silver, saying it
							was better that many should return from the campaign with silver than a
							few with gold. For the officials, he said, ought to accept no other
							increase in the provinces except the increase of their repute.f

He had five persons to wait upon him in the campaign, one of whom bought three of the
							captives. But when he discovered that Cato knew of it, he did not wait
							to come before his master, but hanged himself.

He was urged by Scipio Africanus to lend his influence to
							help the banished Achaeans to return to their homes, but he made as
							though he cared nothing about the matter; in the Senate, however, where
							the subject aroused much discussion, he arose and said, We sit here as if we had nothing to do, debating
								about some poor old Greeks whether they shall be carried to their
								graves by bearers who live in our country or in Greece.

Postumius Albinus wrote a history in the Greek language, in
							which he craved the indulgence of his readers. Cato said sarcastically
							that he ought to be granted indulgence if he had written the book under
							compulsion by a decree of the Ampictyonic Council!

The Younger Scipio, they say, in the fifty-four years of
							his life bought nothing, sold nothing, built nothing, and left only
							thirty-three pounds of silver and two of gold in a great estate. So
							little he left, in spite of the fact that he was master of Carthage, and
							was the one among the generals who had made his soldiers richest.

He observed the precept of Polybius, and tried never to leave the Forum before he had in some
							way made an acquaintance and friend of somebody among those who spoke
							with him.

While he was still a young man he had such repute for
							bravery and sagacity that when Cato the Elder was asked about the men in
							the army at Carthage, of whom Scipio was one, he said, He, and he only, has wisdom; the rest are but
								fluttering shadows.

When he came to Rome from a campaign, the people called him
							to office, not by way of showing favour
							to him, but hoping through him to capture Carthage speedily and easily.

After he had passed the outer wall, the Carthaginians
							stoutly defended themselves in the citadel. He perceived that the sea
							lying between was not very deep, and Polybius advised him to scatter in
							it iron balls with projecting points, or else to throw into it planks
							full of spikes so that the enemy might not cross and attack the Roman
							ramparts. But
							Scipio said that it was ridiculous, after they were in possession of the
							walls and well within the city, to endeavour to avoid fighting the
							enemy.

He found the city full of Greek statues and votive
							offerings, which had come from Sicily, and so 
							he caused proclamation to be made that the men from those cities who
							were there might identify them and carry them away.

He would not allow either slave or freedman of his to take
							anything or even buy anything from the spoil, when everybody was engaged
							in looting and plundering.

He was active in the support of Gaius Laelius, the dearest
							of his friends, when he was a candidate for the consulship, and he
							inquired of Pompey whether he
							also was a candidate. (It was reputed that Pompey was the son of a
							flute-player.) Pompey said that he was not a candidate, and offered to
							take Laelius about with him and help him in his canvass, and they,
							believing his words and waiting for his co-operation, were completely
							deceived. For it was reported that Pompey was himself going about and
							soliciting the citizens. The others were indignant, but Scipio laughed
							and said, It is because of our own stupidity; for,
								just as if we were intending to call not upon men but upon gods, we
								have been wasting any amount of time in waiting for a flute-player
								!

When Appius Claudius was his rival for the
							censorship, and asserted that he greeted all the Romans by name, while
							Scipio knew hardly one of them, Scipio said, You
								are quite right; for I have not taken such pains to know many as to
								be unknown to none.

He bade the people, inasmuch as they happened to be waging
							war against the Celtiberians, to send out both
							himself and his rival either as legates or tribunes of the soldiers, and
							take the word and judgement of the fighting men in regard to the valour
							of each.

After he was made censor, he deprived a young knight of his
							horse because, at the time when war was being waged against Carthage,
							this young man had given an expensive dinner for which he had ordered an
							honey-cake to be made in the form of the city, and, calling this
							Carthage, he set it before the company for them to plunder. When the
							young man asked the reason why he had been degraded, Scipio said, Because you plundered Carthage before I did!

Seeing Gaius Licinius coming before him, he said, I know that this man is guilty of perjury, but,
								since no one accuses him, I cannot myself be both accuser and
								judge.

He was sent out by the Senate a third time for the purpose,
							as Cleitomachus says, of Looking upon men's arrogant acts and their acts of
								good order, 
							 that is, as an inspector of cities, peoples, and kings; and
							when he arrived at Alexandria and, after disembarking, was walking with
							his toga covering his head, the Alexandrians quickly surrounded him, and
							insisted that he uncover and show his face to their yearning eyes. And
							so he uncovered amid shouting and applause. The king could hardly keep
							up with them in walking because of his inactive
							life and his pampering of his body, 
							and Scipio whispered softly to Panaetius, Already
								the Alexandrians have received some benefit from our visit. For it
								is owing to us that they have seen their king walk.

His one companion in his travels was a friend Panaetius, a
							philosopher, and there were five servants. When one of these died in a
							foreign land, he did not wish to buy another, and so sent for one from
							Rome.

Inasmuch as the Numantians seemed invincible in battle and
							had vanquishedany generals, the people made Scipio consul the second
							time for this war. When many were eager to enlist for the
							campaign, the Senate intervened, on the ground that Italy would be
							unprotected. Moreover, they would not allow him to take money from what
							was already on hand, but set aside for his use the revenues from taxes
							not yet due. Scipio said that he did not need monev, for his own and
							that of his friends would be sufficient; but in regard to the soldiers
							he did find fault. For
							he said that the war was a hard war; if it was owing to the bravery of
							the enemy that they had been vanquished so many times, then it was hard
							because it was against such men; if it was owing to the want of bravery
							in their own citizens, then it was hard because it must be conducted
							with such men.

When he arrived at the camp, and found there much disorder,
							licentiousness, superstition, and luxury, he straightway drove out the
							soothsayers, diviners, and panders, and issued orders to send away all camp-utensils except a pot, a spit,
							and an earthenware drinking-cup. But he conceded a goblet of silverware
							of not more than two pounds weight to those who wished to keep such. He
							forbade bathing, and of those who took a rub-down he required that each
							man should rub himself, saying that the pack-animals, not being provided
							with hands, needed somebody to rub them. He also issued orders that the
							soldiers should eat their luncheon standing, and that it should be
							something uncooked, but that they might recline at dinner, and this
							should be bread or porridge simply, and meat roasted or boiled. He
							himself went about with a black cloak pinned around him, saying that he
							was in mourning for the disgrace of the army.

He detected in the baggage carried by the pack-animals of
							Memmius, a military tribune, wine coolers set with precious stones, the
							work of Thericles, and said to him,
								 By such conduct you have made yourself useless
								to me and your country for thirty days, but useless to yourself for your
								whole lifetime.

When another man showed him a shield beautifully
							ornamented, he said, A fine shield, young sir;
								but it is more fitting that a Roman rest his hopes in his right hand
								rather than in his left.

Another carrying a timber for the palisade said that it was
							awfully heavy. Very likely, said Scipio, for you put more trust in this wood than in your
								sword.

Observing the recklessness of the enemy, he said that he
							himself was buying security with time; for a good general, like a
							physician, needed to operate with steel only as a last resort. 
							Nevertheless he attacked at the proper time and routed the Numantians.

When the older men asked the defeated soldiers why they
							were such cowards as to flee from the men they had so often pursued, one
							of the Numantians is said to have replied that the sheep were still the
							same sheep, but another man was their shepherd.

After he had captured Numantia and celebrated his second
							triumph, he had a falling out with Gaius Gracchus in regard to the
							Senate and the allies; and the people, feeling much aggrieved, set out
							to shout him down on the rostra. But he said, The
								battle-cry of armed hosts has never discomfited me, and much less
								can that of a rabble of whom I know full well that Italy is not
								their real mother, but their stepmother.

When the men about Gracchus cried out, Kill the tyrant, he said, Very naturally those who feel hostile towards our
								country wish to make away with me first; for it is not possible for
								Rome to fall while Scipio stands, nor for Scipio to live when Rome
								has fallen.

When Caecilius Metellvs was desirous of leading his men
							against a strongly fortified place, a centurion 
							said that with the loss of only ten men Metellvs could take the place.
							Metellus asked him if he wished to be one of the ten !

A certain centurion among the younger men inquired what he
							was going to do. If I thought, said he, that the shirt on my back knew what is in my
								mind, I would strip it off and put it in the fire.

He was bitterly opposed to Scipio while Scipio lived, but felt very sad when he died, and commanded his sons
							to take part in carrying the bier. He said that he felt grateful to the
							gods, for Rome's sake, that Scipio had not been born among another
							people.

Gaius Marius carne from an obscure family and advanced into
							political life through his military services. He announced himself a
							candidate for the greater aedileship, but,
							perceiving that he was running behind, on the very same day he went
							after the lesser. Failing also to
							obtain that, he nevertheless did not give up the idea that he should
							some day be the first among the Romans.

He had large varicose veins on both legs, and, refusing to
							be fastened down, he submitted these to his physician for excision; and
							without a groan or even a contraction of his eyebrows he underwent the
							operation with fortitude. But as the physician 
							turned his attention to the other leg, Marius would not consent, saying
							that the cure was not worth the pain.

In his second consulship Lusius, his nephew, attempted an
							indecent assault on one of the youths in the army, by the name of
							Trebonius, and the youth killed Lusius. When many accused him of the
							crime, he did not deny that he had killed the officer, and disclosed the
							circumstances; whereupon Marius ordered the crown which is given for
							deeds of supreme valour to be brought, and this he placed upon
							Trebonius.

Encamped against the Teutons in a place which had little
							water, when the soldiers said they were thirsty, he pointed out to them
							a river flowing close by the enemy's palisade, saying, There is drink for you which can be bought with
								blood. And they called upon him to lead them on while the blood
							within them was fluid and not all dried up by their thirst.

In the Cimbrian wars a thousand men of Camerinum who had
							acquitted themselves bravely he made Roman citizens, in accord with no
							law. To those who complained he said that he did not hear the laws
							because of the clash of arms.

In the Civil War, 
							when he found himself surrounded by a trench
							and cut off by the enemy, he held out and bided his own time. Pompaedius
								 Silo said to him, If you
								are a great general, Marius, come down and fight it out. Marius
							replied, If you are a great general, make me fight
								it out when I do not wish to do so !

Catulus Lutatius, in the Cimbrian War, was encamped beside
							the Atiso River. The Romans, seeing the barbarians crossing to
							attack, retreated, and he, not being able to check them, made haste to
							put himself in the front rank of those who were running away so that
							they might not seem to flee from the enemy, but to be following their
							commander.

Sulla, who was called the Fortunate, counted two things
							among his greatest pieces of fortune : the friendship of Pius Metellus,
							and the fact that he had not razed Athens, but had spared the city.

Gaius Popillius was sent 
							 draw his army from Egypt, and not to usurp the
							kingdom of Ptolemy's children who were bereft of their parents. As he
							was making his approach through the camp, Antiochus welcomed him
							graciously while he was still a long way off, but he, without returning
							the salutation, delivered the document. When the king had read it, he
							said that he would think about it, and give his answer; whereupon
							Popillius drew a circle about him with his staff and said, While you stand inside that line, think about it
								and answer. All were astounded at the man's lofty spirit, and
							Antiochus agreed to comply with the Roman decree; which done, Popillius
							saluted him and embraced him.

Lucullus in Armenia with ten thousand menat-arms and a
							thousand horsemen was proceeding against Tigranes, who had an army of an
							hundred and fifty thousand men, on the sixth day of October, the day on
							which, some years before, the force with Caepio had been
							annihilated by the Cimbrians. When somebody remarked that the Romans set
							that day aside as a dread day of expiation, he said, Then let us on this day strive with might and
								main to make this, instead of an ill-omened and gloomy day, a glad
								and welcome day to the Romans.

His soldiers feared most the men in full armour, but he bade them not to be afraid, saying that
							it would be harder work to strip these men than to defeat them. He was
							the first to advance against the hill, and observing the movement of the
							barbarians, he cried out, We are victorious, my
								men, and, meeting no resistance, he pursued, losing only five
							Romans who fell, and he slew over an hundred thousand of the enemy.

Gnaeus Pompey was loved by the Romans as much as his father
							was hated. 
							In his youth he was heart and soul for Sulla's party, and without
							holding public office or being in the Senate, he enlisted many men in
							Italy for the army. 
							When Sulla summoned him, he refused to present his troops before the
							commander-in-chief without spoils and without their having been through
							bloodshed. And he did not come until after he had vanquished the
							generals of the enemy in many battles.

When he was sent by Sulla to Sicily in the
							capacity of general, he perceived that the soldiers on the marches kept
							dropping out of the ranks to do violence and to plunder, and so he
							punished those who were straggling and running about, and placed seals
							upon the swords of those who were officially sent by him.

The Mamertines, who had joined the other party, he was like
							to put to death to a man. But Sthennius, their popular leader, said that
							Pompey was not doing right in punishing many
							innocent men instead of one man who was responsible, and that this man
							was himself, who had persuaded his friends, and compelled his enemies,
							to choose the side of Marius. Much amazed, Pompey said that he could
							pardon the Mamertines if they had been persuaded by a man like him who
							valued his country above his own life; and thereupon he liberated both
							the city and Sthennius.

He crossed over to Africa against Domitius 
							and overcame him in a mighty battle; then, when the soldiers were
							hailing him as commander-in-chief, he said he could not accept the
							honour while the enemy's palisade still stood upright. And they, in
							spite of a heavy rain that enveloped them, swept on and plundered the
							camp.

When he returned, Sulla received him graciously with many
							honours, and was the first to call him ' Magnus ' (The Great). He
							desired to celebrate a triumph, but Sulla would not allow him to do so,
							since he was not as yet a member of the Senate. When Pompey remarked to
							those present that Sulla did not realize that more people worship the
							rising than the setting sun, Sulla cried out, Let
								him have his triumph ! Servilius, a man of noble family, was
							indignant, and many of the soldiers stood in his way with their demands
							of largess before his triumph. But when Pompey said that he would rather
							give up his triumph than curry favour with them, Servilius said that now
							he saw that Pompey was truly great, and deserved his triumph.

It is a custom in Rome for the knights, when they have completed the regular term of service
							in the army, to lead their horses into the Forum, one at a time, before
							the two men whom they call censors, and after enumerating their
							campaigns and the generals under whom they served, to receive such
							commendation or censure as is fitting. Pompey, who was then consul, with
							his own hand led his horse before the censors, Gellius and Lentulus, and
							when they asked him, in conformity with the custom, whether he had
							served all his campaigns, he replied, Yes, all,
								and under myself as commander-in-chief.

On gaining possession of the papers of Sertorius in Spain,
							among which were letters from many leading men inviting Sertorius to
							come to Rome with a view to fomenting a revolution and changing the
							government, he burned them all, thus offering an opportunity for the
							miscreants to repent and become better men.

When Phraates, king of the Parthians, sent to him, claiming
							the right to set his boundary at the river Euphrates, he said that the
							Romans set justice as their boundary towards the Parthians.

Lucius Lucullus, after his campaigns, gave himself up to
							pleasures and lived very expensively, and strongly disapproved of
							Pompey's yearning for the strenuous life as something out of keeping
							with his years. But Pompey said that for an old man it was more out of
							keeping with his years to be a voluptuary than to hold office.

When he was ill his physician prescribed a thrush as diet,
							but those who tried to get one did not find any, for thrushes were out
							of season; however, somebody said that they would be found at the house
							of Lucullus, where they were kept the year round. So then, said Pompey, if Lucullus were
								not a voluptuary, Pompey could not live ! and letting his
							physician go, he made his diet of things not so hard to procure.

At a time when there was a serious scarcity of grain in
							Rome he was appointed nominally overseer of the market, but
							actually supreme master on land and sea, and sailed to Africa, Sardinia,
							and Sicily. Having got together a great quantity of grain, he was eager
							to get to Rome. A great storm arose and the pilots were hesitating, when
							he, going on board first himself, gave orders to weigh anchor, crying
							out, To sail is a necessity; to live is not a
								necessity.

When his falling-out with Caesar came to light, one
							Mareellinus, who was among those reputed to have been advanced by Pompey
							but had gone over to Caesar, inveighed against him at great length in
							the Senate. Mareellinus, said Pompey, are you not ashamed to revile me, when it is all
								owing to me that you, from being inarticulate, have become so
								fluent, and from being a starveling, are now able to eat and
								disgorge and eat again ?

Cato assailed him bitterly, because when he himself had
							often foretold that Caesar's power and his rise
							to fame boded no good to the democracy, Pompey had taken the opposite
							side; whereupon Pompey replied, Your words were
								more prophetic, but my actions were more friendly.

Speaking frankly about himself, he said that he had
							attained every office sooner than he had expected, and laid it down
							sooner than had been expected. 
							15. After the battle of Pharsalus he fled to
							Egypt, and as he was about to transfer from the trireme to a
							fishing-boat which the king had sent for him, he turned to his wife and
							son, and said never a word except the lines of Sophocles : Whoever comes to traffic with a king Is slave to
								him, however free he come. 
							 When he landed, he was struck with a sword, and uttering one
							groan, he covered his face and surrendered himself to be slain.

Cicero, the orator, was often twitted about his name, and
							his friends urged him to have it changed, but he said that he would make
							Cicero to be held in higher esteem than the Catos, the Catuli, and the
							Scauri.

When he dedicated a silver goblet to the gods, he caused the engraver to cut the letters of
							his first two names, but instead of Cicero to
							engrave a chick-pea.

He used to say that those of the orators who are given to
							violent vociferation rely on noise to carry them through because of
							weakness, just as lame men mount horses.

Verres, who had a son that had been anything but virtuous
							when a boy, rebuked Cicero for effeminacy and called him a corrupter of
							youth. Don't you know, said Cicero, that it is proper for children to be scolded
								behind the doors of their own home ?

Metellus Nepos said to him, You have
								caused the death of more men by your testimony than you have saved
								by your advocacy. 
							 Yes, said Cicero, the
								reason is that I am endowed with more credibility than eloquence
								!

When Metellus kept asking him who his father was, Cicero
							said, The answer to that same question your mother
								has made the more difficult for you ! For Metellus's mother was
							far from virtuous, and Metellus himself was light-minded, vacillating,
							and carried away by his impulses.

When Diodotus, Metellus's teacher of oratory died, Metellus
							had a marble raven placed over his grave. A very
								just tribute, said Cicero, for he taught
								Metellus to be high-flown, but not to be a speaker.

Vatinius, who was at odds with Cicero, and was a bad
							character generally, Cicero heard was dead, and then later discovered
							that he was alive. Curses on the rascal who lied
								so ! said he.

To a man who appeared to be of African race, and asserted that he could not hear Cicero when he
							spoke, Cicero retorted, Yet you have ears that are
								not wanting in holes.

Cicero summoned as a witness in a certain case Castus
							Popillius, who wanted to be a lawyer, but was ignorant and stupid. When
							he denied knowing anything, Cicero said, Very
								likely you think you are being asked about some point of law !

Hortensius, the orator, received as a fee a silver sphinx
							from Verres. When Cicero used innuendo in something that he said,
							Hortensius declared that he had no skill in solving riddles. Cicero
							retorted, And yet you have the sphinx at your
								house !

Meeting Voconius with three daughters who had very ugly
							faces, he said softly to his friends, Phoebus
								forbade when he his children got.

When Faustus, the son of Sulla, because of a multitude of
							debts, posted a notice of an auction of his goods, Cicero said, I find this notice more welcome than the kind
								which his father used to post.

When Pompey and Caesar took opposite sides, he said, I know from whom I flee without knowing to whom
								to flee.

He blamed Pompey for abandoning the city, and imitating Themistocles rather than
							Pericles, when his situation was not like that of Themistocles, but
							rather that of Pericles.

When he went over to Pompey s side, changing his mind
							again, and was asked by Pompey where he had left Piso, his son-in-law,
							he said, With your father-in-law !

One man changed from Caesar's side to Pompey's, and said
							that as the result of haste and eagerness he had left his horse behind.
							Cicero said that the man showed greater consideration-for his horse !

To the man who reported that Caesar's friends were downcast
							he retorted, You speak as if they were Caesar's
								foes !

After the battle of Pharsalus, when Pompey had fled, one
							Nonius declared that on their side were still seven eagles, and exhorted
							them, therefore, to have courage. Your advice
								would be good, said Cicero, if we were
								making war on jackdaws.

After Caesar had conquered, he set up again with honour
							Pompey s statues which had been thrown down. Cicero, in speaking of him,
							said that Caesar, by restoring Pompey's statues, made his own secure.

He set a very high value on excellent speaking, and strove
							especially for this, so much so that once, when he had a case to plead
							before the court of the centum viri, and the day was almost come, and
							his slave Eros reported to him that the case
							had been postponed to the following day, he gave the slave his freedom.

Gaius Caesar, while still a young man, in trying to escape
							from Sulla, fell into the hands of pirates. First of all, when demand
							was made upon him for a very large sum of money, he laughed at the
							robbers for their ignorance of the man they had in their power, and
							agreed to give double the sum. Later, being kept under guard while he
							was getting together the money, he enjoined upon the men that they
							should give him a quiet time for sleep and should not talk. He wrote
							speeches and poems, and read them to his captors, and those who did not
							speak very highly of them he called dull barbarians, and threatened
							laughingly to hang them. And this he actually did a little later. For
							when the ransom was brought, and he was set free, he got together men
							and ships from Asia Minor, seized the robbers, and crucified them.

In Rome he entered into a contest against Catulus, the
							leading man among the Romans, for the office of Pontifex Maximus, 
							and, as he was accompanied to the door by his mother, he said, To-day, mother, you shall have as your son a
								Pontifex Maximus or an exile.

He put away his wife Pompeia because her name was linked in
							gossip with Clodius, but later, when Clodius was brought to trial on
							this charge, and Caesar was cited as a witness,
							he spoke no evil of his wife. And when the prosecutor asked, Then why did you put her out of the house ? 
							he replied, Because Caesar's wife must be free
								from suspicion.

While he was reading of the exploits of Alexander, he burst
							into tears, and said to his friends, When he was
								of my age he had conquered Darius, but, up to now, nothing has been
								accomplished by me.

As he was passing by a miserable little town in the Alps,
							his friends raised the question whether even here there were rival
							parties and contests for the first place. He stopped and becoming
							thoughtful said, I had rather be the first here
								than the second in Rome.

He said that the venturesome and great deeds of daring call
							for action and not for thought.

And he crossed the river Rubicon from his province in Gaul
							against Pompey, saying before all, Let the die be
								cast.

When Pompey had fled to sea from Rome, Caesar wished to
							take money from the treasury, but Metellus, who was in charge, tried to
							stop him, and locked up the treasury, whereupon Caesar threatened to kill him. Metellus was astounded, but Caesar
							said, Young man, that was harder for me to say
								than to do.

As the transportation of his soldiers from Brundusium to
							Dyrrachium proceeded slowly, he, without being seen by anybody, embarked
							in a small boat, and attempted the passage through the open sea. But as
							the boat was being swamped by the waves, he disclosed his identity to
							the pilot, crying out, Trust to Fortune, knowing
								it is Caesar you carry.

At that time he was prevented from crossing, as the storm
							became violent, and his soldiers quickly gathered about him in a state
							of high emotion if it could be that he were waiting for other forces
							because he felt he could not rely on them. A battle was fought and Pompey was victorious; he did not, however, follow
							up his success, but withdrew to his camp. Caesar said, To-day the victory was with the enemy, but they
								have not the man who knows how to be victorious.

At Pharsalus Pompey gave the word for his
							regiments after they had formed for battle to stand in their tracks and
							meet the onset of the enemy. In this Caesar said that he made a mistake,
							inasmuch as he lost the effect on his soldiers of the intensity and
							excitement which comes from rushing to the onset with enthusiasm.

After he had conquered Pharnaces of Pontus by a swift drive
							against him, he wrote to his friends, I came, saw,
								conquered.

Following upon the flight of Scipio and his followers in
							Africa Cato took his own life; whereat Caesar said, I begrudge you your death, Cato, for you
								begrudged me the saving of your life.

Some looked with suspicion upon Antony and Dolabella and
							urged Caesar to be on his guard, but he said that he did not fear these
							fat and sleek tradesmen and craftsmen but those lean and pale fellows,
							indicating Brutus and Cassius.

When the conversation at dinner once digressed to the
							subject of death, regarding what kind of death is the best, he said, Sudden death.

Caesar, who was the first to bear the title of Augustus,
							was only a youth when he made formal demand upon Antony for the million
							pounds which had belonged to the
							first Caesar, who had been assassinated, and which Antony had
							transferred from Caesar's house to his own keeping; for Augustus wished
							to pay to the citizens of Rome the sum which had been left to them by
							Caesar, three pounds to each man. But when
							Antony held fast to the money, and also suggested to Augustus that, if
							he had any sense, he had better forget about his demand, Augustus
							announced an auction of his ancestral property and sold it; and by
							paying the bequest he fostered popularity for himself and hatred for
							Antony on the part of the citizens.

Rhoemetalces, king of the Thracians, who had changed his
							alliance from Antony to Augustus, could not practise moderation when
							there was any drinking going on, and gave much offence by his
							disparaging remarks about his new alliance, whereat Augustus, as he
							drank to one of the other kings, said, I like
								treachery, but I cannot say anything good of traitors.

After the capture of Alexandria, the people of the city
							were expecting to be treated with the most frightful severity, but when
							he had mounted the tribune and had directed Areius of Alexandria to take
							a place beside him, he declared that he spared the city, first because
							of its greatness and beauty, secondly because of its founder, Alexander,
							and thirdly because of Areius his own friend.

When it was told him that Eros, procurator in Egypt, had bought a quail
							which had defeated all others in fighting and
							was the undisputed champion, and that Eros had roasted this quail and
							eaten it, the emperor sent for him and examined him regarding the
							charge; and when the man admitted the fact, the emperor ordered him to
							be nailed to a ship's mast.

In Sicily he appointed Areius procurator in place of
							Theodorus; and when someone handed him a paper on which was written, Theodorus of Tarsus is a bald-pate or a thief;
								what opinion have you ? Caesar, having read it, wrote
							underneath, It is my opinion.

From Maecenas, his bosom-friend, he used to receive each
							year on his birthday a drinking-cup as a birthday present.

Athenodorus, the
							philosopher, because of his advanced years begged to be dismissed and
							allowed to go home, and Augustus granted his request. But when
							Athenodorus, as he was taking leave of him, said, Whenever you get angry, Caesar, do not say or do anything before
								repeating to yourself the twenty-four letters of the alphabet, 
							Augustus seized his hand and said, I still have
								need of your presence here, and detained him a whole year,
							saying, —ldquo;No risk attends the meed that
								silence brings. —rdquo;

He learned that Alexander, having completed nearly all his
							conquests by the time he was thirtytwo years old, was at an utter loss
							to know what he should do during the rest of his life, whereat Augustus
							expressed his surprise that Alexander did not regard it as a greater
							task to set in order the empire which he had won than to win it.

After promulgating the law about adulterers, in which it was specified how the
							accused were to be tried, and how the convicted were to be punished, he
							later, under stress of anger, fell upon a young man whose name had been
							linked in gossip with his daughter Julia, and struck him with his fists;
							but when the young man cried out, You have made a
								law, Caesar, such a revulsion of feeling came over him that he
							refused food the rest of the day.

When he dispatched Gaius his daughter's son into Armenia, he besought the gods that
							the popularity of Pompey, the daring of Alexander, and his own good luck
							might attend the young man.

He said that he would leave to the Romans as his successor
							on the throne a man who never had deliberated twice about the same
							thing, meaning Tiberius.

When he was trying to quiet the young men in high station
							who were in an uproar, and they paid no heed, but continued with their
							uproar, he said, Do you young men listen to an old
								man, to whom old men listened when he was young.

When, as it appeared, the Athenian people had committed
							some offence, he wrote from Aegina that he supposed they could not be
							unaware that he was angry; otherwise he would not have spent the whole
							winter in Aegina. But he neither said nor did anything else to
								them.

One of the accusers of Eurycles was unsparing and tiresome with
							his frank utterances, and went so far as to say, If these things, Caesar,' do not seem to you to be of high
								importance, order him to repeat for me the seventh book of Thucydides ; and
							Augustus, much incensed, ordered the man away to prison, but, on
							learning that he was the sole survivor of Brasidas's descendants, he
							sent for him, and, after reproving him moderately, ordered that he be
							released.

When Piso built his house with great care from the foundation to
							the roof-tree, Augustus said, You make my heart
								glad by building thus, as if Rome is to be eternal.