INTRODUCTION 
 
					These two badly mutilated discourses, urging the
					necessity for vegetarianism, are merely extracts
					from a series (see 996 a) which Plutarch delivered in
					his youth, perhaps to a Boeotian audience (995 e). 
					In spite of the exaggerated and calculated rhetoric 
					these fragments probably depict faithfully a foible
					of Plutarch's early manhood, the Pythagorean or
					Orphic abstention from animal food. There is
					little trace of this in his later life as known to us,
					though a corrupt passage in the Symposiacs (635 e)
					seems to say that because of a dream our author
					abstained from eggs for a long time. In the De
					Sanitate Tuenda also (132 a) Plutarch excuses flesh-eating on the ground that habit has become a sort
						of unnatural second nature. 
				 
 
					The work appears, on the whole, rather immature
					beside the Gryllus and the De Sollertia Animalium ,
					but the text is so poor that this may not be the
					author's fault. In fact the excerptor responsible for
					our jumbled text, introducing both stupid interpolations (see especially 998 a) and even an extract from
					an entirely different work (994 b-d), may well have
					
					 
					
					altered Plutarch's wording in many other places
					where we have not the means to detect him.
				 
 
					Porphyry ( De Abstinentia , iii. 24) says that Plutarch attacked the Stoics and Peripatetics in many
					books; in this one the anti-Stoic polemic has only
					just begun (999 a) when the work breaks off. For a
					more complete assault the reader must turn back to
					the two preceding dialogues.
				 
 
					It is interesting to learn that Shelley found these
					fragments inspiring. In the eighth book of Queen
					Mab (verses 211 ff.) we read:
					 
 No longer now
					 
 He slays the lamb that looks him in the face,
					 
 And horribly devours his mangled flesh,
					 
 Which, still avenging Nature's broken law,
					 
 Kindled all putrid humours in his frame,
					 
 All evil passions, and all vain belief,...
					 
 The germs of misery, death, disease, and crime. 
 
					To this passage the poet appended, more suo , a long
					note which ended with four quotations from our essay
					in Greek, untranslated (a compliment to the public
					of his day, one may suppose). This note he subsequently republished as A Vindication of Natural Diet 
					(1813), omitting the Greek; and in the same year he
					wrote to Thomas Hogg that he had translated the
						two Essays of Plutarch, Περὶ σαρκοφαγίας . But this
					has been lost; it has not, at least, been found among
					the unpublished Shelley material in the Bodleian. 
					
				 
 
 
					This is one of the eighteen works of the received
					Corpus of Plutarch that do not appear in the Lamprias
					Catalogue. Such a fact is not, however, to be adduced against its genuineness, since the Symposiacs 
					themselves are not to be found there.

Can you really ask what reason Pythagoras 
					had for abstaining from flesh? For my part I rather
					wonder both by what accident and in what state of
					soul or mind the first man who did so, touched his
					mouth to gore and brought his lips to the flesh of a
					dead creature, he who set forth tables of dead, stale 
					bodies and ventured to call food and nourishment
					the parts that had a little before bellowed and cried,
					moved and lived. How could his eyes endure the
					slaughter when throats were slit and hides flayed and
					limbs torn from limb? How could his nose endure
					the stench? How was it that the pollution did not
					turn away his taste, which made contact with the sores
					of others and sucked juices and serums from mortal
					wounds?
					 
 The skins shivered; and upon the spits the flesh bellowed,
					 
 Both cooked and raw; the voice of kine was heard. 
 
 
					Though this is an invention and a myth, yet that sort
					of dinner is really portentous - when a man craves the
					
					 
					
					meat that is still bellowing, giving instructions which
					tell us on what animals we are to feed while they are
					still alive uttering their cries, and organizing various
					methods of seasoning and roasting and serving. It
					is the man who first began these practices that one
					should seek out, not him who all too late desisted.

Or would everyone declare that the reason for
					those who first instituted flesh-eating was the necessity of their poverty? It was not while they passed
					their time in unlawful desires nor when they had
					necessaries in abundance that after indulgence in
					unnatural and antisocial pleasures they resorted to
					such a practice. If, at this moment, they could recover feelings and voice, they might, indeed, remark: Oh blessed and beloved of the gods, you
						who live now, what an age has fallen to your lot
						wherein you enjoy and assimilate a heritage abounding in good things! How many plants grow for you!
						What vintages you gather! What wealth you may
						draw from the plains and what pleasant sustenance
						from trees! Why, you may even live luxuriously
						without the stain of blood. But as for us, it was a
						most dismal and fearful portion of the world's history 
						that confronted us, falling as we did into great and
						unbearable poverty brought on by our first appearance among the living. As yet the heavens and the
						stars were concealed by dense air that was contaminated with turbid moisture, not easily to be
						penetrated, and fire and furious wind. Not yet was
						
						 
						
						the sun established undeviating
						 
 In his firm course,
						 
 Dividing day and night; he brought them back
						 
 Again and crowned them with the fruitful hours
						 
 All wreathed with bloom, while violence 
 
						had been done to earth by rivers pouring forth their
						floods at random and most parts were deformed by
						pools. Earth was made a wilderness by deep quagmires and the unfruitful growth of thickets and
						forests; nor was there as yet any agricultural production or professional tool or any resource of skill.
						Our hunger gave us no respite nor was there any
						seed at that time awaiting the annual season of
						sowing. What wonder if, contrary to nature, we
						made use of the flesh of beasts when even mud was
						eaten and the bark of trees devoured, and to light on
						sprouting grass or the root of a rush was a piece of
						luck? When we had tasted and eaten acorns we
						danced for joy around some oak, calling it life-giving 
 and mother and nurse. This was the
						only festival that those times had discovered; all
						else was a medley of anguish and gloom. But you
						who live now, what madness, what frenzy drives
						you to the pollution of shedding blood, you who
						have such a superfluity of necessities? Why slander
						the earth by implying that she cannot support you?
						Why impiously offend law-giving Demeter and
						
						 
						
						bring shame upon Dionysus, lord of the cultivated
						vine, the gracious one, as if you did not receive
						enough from their hands? Are you not ashamed to
						mingle domestic crops with blood and gore? You
						call serpents and panthers and lions savage, but you
						yourselves, by your own foul slaughters, leave them
						no room to outdo you in cruelty; for their slaughter
						is their living, yours is a mere appetizer.

It is certainly not lions and wolves that we eat
					out of self-defence; on the contrary, we ignore these
					and slaughter harmless, tame creatures without
					stings or teeth to harm us, creatures that, I swear,
					Nature appears to have produced for the sake of
					their beauty and grace... 
				 
 
					[It is as though one, seeing the Nile overflow
					its banks, filling the landscape with its fertile and
					productive stream, should not marvel at this, its
					nourishing of plants and its fruitfulness in such crops
					as are most to be cultivated and contribute most
					to the support of life, but should espy a crocodile
					swimming there somewhere or an asp being swept
					along or a thousand other savage creatures and should
					cite them as the reasons for his censure and his
					compulsion to do as he does. Or, I swear, it is as
					though one fixed ones gaze on this land and its soil
					covered with cultivated crops and heavy with ears
					of wheat, and then, looking beneath these rich
					harvests, one were to catch sight somewhere of a
					
					 
					
					growth of darnel or broom-rape and, without more
					ado, ceasing to reap the benefit and claim the booty
					of the good crops, burst into a tirade about the weeds.
					Another example: if one should see an orator
					making a speech at some trial where he was advocate,
					a speech in which his eloquence in full flood was advancing to the succour of someone in jeopardy or
					(so help me) to the conviction or denunciation of rash
					acts or defaults - a flood of eloquence not simple or
					jejune, but charged with many (or rather all kinds
					of) emotional appeals for the simultaneous influencing of the many different kinds of minds in the
					audience or jury, which must either be roused and
					won over or (by heaven!) soothed and made gentle
					and calm - then if one neglected to observe and take
					into account this main point and issue of the matter,
					but merely picked out flaws of style that the flood of
					oratory, as it moved to its goal, had swept along by
					the momentum of its current, flaws that came rushing
					out and slipped by with the rest - and seeing... of
					some popular leader... ]

But nothing abashed us, not the flower-like
					tinting of the flesh, not the persuasiveness of the
					harmonious voice, not the cleanliness of their habits
					or the unusual intelligence that may be found in the
					poor wretches. No, for the sake of a little flesh we
					deprive them of sun, of light, of the duration of life
					to which they are entitled by birth and being. Then
					we go on to assume that when they utter cries and
					squeaks their speech is inarticulate, that they do
					not, begging for mercy, entreating, seeking justice,
					
					 
					
					each one of them say, I do not ask to be spared in
						ease of necessity; only spare me your arrogance!
						Kill me to eat, but not to please your palate! Oh,
					the cruelty of it! What a terrible thing it is to look
					on when the tables of the rich are spread, men who
					employ cooks and spicers to groom the dead! And
					it is even more terrible to look on when they are
					taken away, for more is left than has been eaten.
					So the beasts died for nothing! There are others who
					refuse when the dishes are already set before them
					and will not have them cut into or sliced. Though
					they bid spare the dead, they did not spare the
					living.

We declare, then, that it is absurd for them to
					say that the practice of flesh-eating is based on
					Nature. For that man is not naturally carnivorous
					is, in the first place, obvious from the structure of his
					body. A man's frame is in no way similar to those
					creatures who were made for flesh-eating: he has
					no hooked beak or sharp nails or jagged teeth, no
					strong stomach or warmth of vital fluids able to
					digest and assimilate a heavy diet of flesh. It is
					from this very fact, the evenness of our teeth, the
					smallness of our mouths, the softness of our tongues,
					our possession of vital fluids too inert to digest meat
					that Nature disavows our eating of flesh. If you
					declare that you are naturally designed for such a
					diet, then first kill for yourself what you want to eat.
					Do it, however, only through your own resources,
					
					 
					
					unaided by cleaver or cudgel of any kind or axe.
					Rather, just as wolves and bears and lions themselves
					slay what they eat, so you are to fell an ox with your
					fangs or a boar with your jaws, or tear a lamb or
					hare in bits. Fall upon it and eat it still living, as
					animals do. But if you wait for what you eat to be
					dead, if you have qualms about enjoying the flesh
					while life is still present, why do you continue,
					contrary to nature, to eat what possesses life? Even
					when it is lifeless and dead, however, no one eats the
					flesh just as it is; men boil it and roast it, altering
					it by fire and drugs, recasting and diverting and
					smothering with countless condiments the taste of
					gore so that the palate may be deceived and accept
					what is foreign to it.
				 
 
					It was, indeed, a witty remark of the Spartan 
					who bought a little fish in an inn and gave it to the
					innkeeper to prepare. When the latter asked for
					cheese and vinegar and oil, the Spartan said, If I
						had those, I should not have bought a fish. But we
					are so refined in our blood-letting that we term flesh
					a supplementary food ; and then we need supplements for the flesh itself, mixing oil, wine, honey,
					fish paste, vinegar, with Syrian and Arabian spices, 
					as though we were really embalming a corpse for
					
					 
					
					burial. The fact is that meat is so softened and
					dissolved and, in a way, predigested that it is hard
					for digestion to cope with it; and if digestion loses
					the battle, the meats affect us with dreadful pains
					and malignant forms of indigestion.

Diogenes ventured to eat a raw octopus in
					order to put an end to the inconvenience of preparing
					cooked food. In the midst of a large throng he
					veiled his head and, as he brought the flesh to his
					mouth, said, It is for you that I am risking my life. 
					Good heavens, a wondrous fine risk! Just like
					Pelopidas for the liberty of the Thebans or Harmodius and Aristogiton for that of the Athenians,
					this philosopher risked his life struggling with a raw
					octopus - in order to brutalize our lives!
				 
 
					Note that the eating of flesh is not only physically
					against nature, but it also makes us spiritually coarse
					and gross by reason of satiety and surfeit. For wine
						and indulgence in meat make the body strong and
						vigorous, but the soul weak. 
 And in order that I
					may not offend athletes, I shall take my own people as
					examples. It is a fact that the Athenians used to call
					us Boeotians beef-witted and insensitive and foolish,
					precisely because we stuffed ourselves. 
 These
						
						 
						
						men are swine 
 ;... and Menander says, Who
							have jaws ; and Pindar 
 And then to learn... ;
					 A dry soul is wisest according to Heraclitus. 
					Empty jars make a noise when struck, but full
					ones do not resound to blows. Thin bronze objects
					will pass the sounds from one to another in a circle
					until you dampen and deaden the noise with your
					hand as the beat goes round. The eye when it is
					flooded by an excess of moisture grows dim and
					weakened for its proper task. When we examine the
					sun through dank atmosphere and a fog of gross
					vapours, we do not see it clear and bright, but submerged and misty, with elusive rays. In just the
					same way, then, when the body is turbulent and surfeited and burdened with improper food, the lustre
					and light of the soul inevitably come through it
					blurred and confused, aberrant and inconstant, since
					the soul lacks the brilliance and intensity to penetrate to the minute and obscure issues of active life.

But apart from these considerations, do you not
					find here a wonderful means of training in social
					responsibility? Who could wrong a human being
					when he found himself so gently and humanely disposed
					
					 
					
					toward other non-human creatures? Two days
					ago in a discussion I quoted the remark of Xenocrates, that the Athenians punished the man who
					had flayed a ram while it was still alive; yet, as
					I think, he who tortures a living creature is no worse
					than he who slaughters it outright. But it seems
					that we are more observant of acts contrary to convention than of those that are contrary to nature. In
					that place, then, I made my remarks in a popular
					vein. I still hesitate, however, to attempt a discussion of the principle underlying my opinion, great as
					it is, and mysterious and incredible, as Plato says,
					with merely clever men of mortal opinions, just as a
					steersman hesitates to shift his course in the midst
					of a storm, or a playwright to raise his god from the
					machine in the midst of a play. Yet perhaps it is
					not unsuitable to set the pitch and announce the
					theme by quoting some verses of Empedocles. ...
					By these lines he means, though he does not say so
					directly, that human souls are imprisoned in mortal
					bodies as a punishment for murder, the eating of
					animal flesh, and cannibalism. This doctrine, however, seems to be even older, for the stories told about
					the sufferings and dismemberment of Dionysus and
					the outrageous assaults of the Titans upon him, and
					their punishment and blasting by thunderbolt after
					they had tasted his blood - all this is a myth which
					in its inner meaning has to do with rebirth. For to
					
					 
					
					that faculty in us which is unreasonable and disordered and violent, and does not come from the
					gods, but from evil spirits, the ancients gave the
					name Titans, that is to say, those that are punished
					and subjected to correction...