No doubt, my dear Celsus, you think it a slight
and trivial matter to bid me set down in a book and
send you the history of Alexander, the impostor of
Abonoteichus, including all his clever schemes, bold
emprises, and sleights of hand; but in point of fact,
if one should aim to examine each detail closely, it
would be no less a task than to record the exploits
of Philip’s son Alexander. The one was as great in
' villainy as the other in heroism. Nevertheless, if
it should be your intention to overlook faults as you
read, and to fill out for yourself the gaps in my tale,
I will undertake the task for you and will essay to
clean up that Augean stable, if not wholly, yet to
the extent of my ability, fetching out some few
basketsful, so that from them you may judge how
great, how inexpressible, was the entire quantity



 

of filth that three thousand head of cattle were
able to create in many years.

I blush for both of us, I confess, both for you and
for myself—for you because you want a consummate
rascal perpetuated in memory and in writing, and
for myself because I am devoting my energy to such
an end, to the exploits of a man who does not
deserve to have polite people read about him, but
rather to have the motley crowd in a vast amphitheatre see him being torn to pieces by foxes or
apes. Yet if anyone brings this reproach against
us, we shall be able to refer to an apt precedent.
Arrian, the disciple of Epictetus, a Roman of the
highest distinction, and a life-long devotee of letters,
laid himself open to the same charge, and so can plead
our cause as well as his own; he thought fit, you
know, to record the life of Tillorobus, the brigand. 
In our own case, however, we shall commemorate a
far more savage brigand, since our hero plied his
trade not in forests and mountains, but in cities, and
instead of infesting just Mysia and Mount Ida and
harrying a few of the more deserted districts of
Asia, he filled the whole Roman Empire, I may
say, with his brigandage.

First I shall draw you a word-picture of the man
himself, making as close a likeness as I can, although
I am not particularly good at drawing. As regards
his person—in order that I may exhibit this also to
ou—he was tall and handsome in appearance, and
really godlike ; his skin was fair, his beard not very


 

thick ; his long hair was in part natural, in part
false, but very similar, so that most people did not
detect that it was not his own. His eyes shone
with a great glow of fervour and enthusiasm ; his
voice was at once very sweet and very clear; and in
a word, no fault could be found with him in any
respect as far as all that went.

Such, then, was his outward appearance ; but his
soul and his mind—O Heracles Forfender ! O Zeus,
Averter of Mischief! O Twin Brethren, our Saviours !
may it be the fortune of our enemies and ill-wishers
to encounter and have to do with the like of him!
In understanding, quick-wittedness, and penetration
he was far beyond everyone else; and activity of
mind, readiness to learn, retentiveness, natural aptitude for studies—all these qualities were his, in every
case to the full. But he made the worst possible use
of them, and with these noble instruments at his
service soon became the most perfect rascal of all those
who have been notorious far and wide for villainy, surpassing the Cercopes, surpassing Eurybatus, or Phrynondas, or Aristodemus, or Sostratus. _ He himself,
writing to his son-in-law Rutilianus once upon a
time and speaking of himself with the greatest
reserve, claimed to be like Pythagoras; but—
with all due respect to Pythagoras, a wise man
of more than human intelligence—if he had been
this man’s contemporary, he would have seemed
a child, I am very sure, beside him! In the
name of the Graces, do not imagine that I say this
to insult Pythagoras, or in the endeavour to bring




 

them into connection with one another by likening
their doings. On the contrary, if all that is worst
and most opprobrious in what is said of Pythagoras
to discredit him (which I for my part cannot believe
to be true) should nevertheless be brought together
for comparison, the whole of it would be but an
infinitesimal part of Alexander’s knavery. In sum,
imagine, please, and mentally configure a highly
diversified soul-blend, made up of lying, trickery,
perjury, and malice; facile, audacious, venturesome,
diligent in the execution of its schemes, plausible,
convincing, masking as good, and wearing an appearance absolutely opposite to its purpose. Indeed,
there is nobody who, after meeting him for the first
time, did not come away with the idea that he was
the most honest and upright man in the world—yes,
and the most simple and unaffected. And on top
of all this, he had the quality of magnificence, of
forming no petty designs but always keeping his
mind upon the most important objects.

While he was still a mere boy, and a very handsome one, as could be inferred from the sere and
yellow leaf of him, and could also be learned by
hearsay from those who recounted his story, he
trafficked freely in his attractiveness and sold his
company to those who sought it. Among others, he
had an admirer who was a quack, one of those who
advertise enchantments, miraculous incantations,
charms for your love-affairs, “sendings” for your
enemies, disclosures of buried treasure, and successions to estates. As this man saw that he was an apt
lad, more than ready to assist him in his affairs, and


 

that the boy was quite as much enamoured with his
roguery as he with the boy’s beauty, he gave him a
thorough education and constantly made use of him
as helper, servant, and acolyte. He himself was
professedly a public physician, but, as Homer says
of the wife of Thon, the Egyptian, he knew

 
 
 Many a drug that was good in a compound, and
many a bad one, 
 
 Odyssey4, 230. 
 

all of which Alexander inherited and took over.
This teacher and admirer of his was a man of Tyana
by birth, one of those who had been followers of
the notorious Apollonius, and who knew his whole
bag of tricks. You see what sort of school the man
that I am describing comes from !

Alexander was just getting his beard when the
death of the Tyanean put him in a bad way, since it
coincided with the passing of his beauty, by which
he might have supported himself. So he abandoned
petty projects for ever. He formed a partnership
with a Byzantine writer of choral songs, one of
those who enter the public competitions, far more
abominable than himself by nature—Cocconas, I
think, was his nickname,—and they went about the
country practising quackery and sorcery, and “trimming the fatheads”—for so they style the public in
the traditional patter of magicians. Well, among
these they hit upon a rich Macedonian woman, past
her prime but still eager to be charming, and not
only lined their purses fairly well at her expense,
but went with her from Bithynia to Macedon. She



 

came from Pella, a place once flourishing in the time
of the kings of Macedon but now insignificant, with
very few inhabitants.

There they saw great serpents, quite tame and gentle, so that they were
kept by women, slept with children, let themselves
be stepped upon, were not angry when they were
stroked, and took milk from the breast just like
babies. There are many such in the country, and
that, probably, is what gave currency in former days
to the story about Olympias ; no doubt a serpent of
that sort slept with her when she was carrying
Alexander. So they bought one of the reptiles,
the finest, for a few coppers;

and, in the words of
Thucydides: ‘Here beginneth the war!” 

 
As you might have expected of two consummate
rascals, greatly daring, fully prepared for mischief,
who had put their heads together, they readily
discerned that human life is swayed by two great
tyrants, hope and fear, and that a man who could
use both of these to advantage would speedily enrich
himself. For they perceived that both to one who
fears and to one who hopes, foreknowledge is very
essential and very keenly coveted, and that long ago
not only Delphi, but Delos and Clarus and Branchidae, had become rich and famous because, thanks
to the tyrants just mentioned, hope and fear, men
continually visited their sanctuaries and sought to
learn the future in advance, and to that end sacrificed
hecatombs and dedicated ingots of gold. By turning
all this round and round in conference .with one



 

another and keeping it astir, they concocted the
project of founding a prophetic shrine and oracle,
hoping that if they should succeed in it, they would
at once be rich and prosperous—which, in fact, befell
them in greater measure than they at first expected,
and turned out better than they hoped.

Then they began planning, first about the place,
and next, what should be the commencement and
the character of the venture. Cocconas thought
Chalcedon a suitable and convenient place, close
to Thrace and Bithynia, and not far, too, from Asia 
and Galatia and all the peoples of the interior.
Alexander, on the other hand, preferred his own
home, saying—and it was true—that to commence
such a venture they needed “fat-heads”’ and simpletons to be their victims, and such, he said, were the
Paphlagonians who lived up above Abonoteichus, who
were for the most part superstitious and rich; whenever a man but turned up with someone at his heels
to play the flute or the tambourine or the cymbals,
telling fortunes with a sieve, as the phrase goes, 




 

they were all agog over him on the instant and
stared at him as if he were a god from heaven.

There was no slight difference of opinion between them on that score, but in the end Alexander
won, and going to Chalcedon, since after all that
city seemed to them to have some usefulness, in the
temple of Apollo, which is the most ancient in
Chalcedon, they buried bronze tablets which said
that very soon Asclepius, with his father Apollo,
would move to Pontus and take up his residence at
Abonoteichus. The opportune discovery of these
tablets caused this story to spread quickly to all
Bithynia and Pontus, and to Abonoteichus sooner
than anywhere else. Indeed, the people of that
city immediately voted to build a temple and began
at once to dig for the foundations. Then Cocconas
was left behind in Chalcedon, composing equivocal,
ambiguous, obscure oracles, and died before long,
bitten, I think, by a viper.

It was Alexander who
was sent in first; he now wore his hair long, had
falling ringlets, dressed in a parti-coloured tunic of
white and purple, with a white cloak over it, and
carried a falchion like that of Perseus, from whom
he claimed descent on his mother’s side. And although those miserable Paphlagonians knew that
both his parents were obscure, humble folk, they
believed the oracle when it said:
“Here in your sight is a scion of Perseus, dear
unto Phoebus ;
This is divine Alexander, who shareth the blood of
the Healer!”

 

Podaleirius, the Healer, it would appear, was so
passionate and amorous that his ardour carried him
all the way from Tricca to Paphlagonia in quest of
Alexander’s mother ! 
An oracle by now had turned up which purported
to be a prior prediction by the Sibyl :

 
 On the shores of the Euxine sea, in the neighbourhood of Sinope, 
 There shall be born, by a Tower, in the days of the Romans, a prophet ; 
 After the foremost unit and three times ten, he will shew forth 
 Five more units besides, and a score told three times over, 
 Matching, with places four, the name of a valiant defender !

Well, upon invading his native land with all this
pomp and circumstance after a long absence,
Alexander was a man of mark and note, affecting
as he did to have occasional fits of madness and
causing his mouth to fill with foam. This he easily
managed by chewing the root of soapwort, the plant
that dyers use; but to his fellow-countrymen even
the foam seemed supernatural and awe-inspiring.
Then, too, they had long ago prepared and fitted
up a serpent’s head of linen, which had something



 

of a human look, was all painted up, and appeared very
lifelike. It would open and close its mouth by
means of horsehairs, and a forked black tongue like
a snake’s, also controlled by horsehairs, would dart
out. Besides, the serpent from Pella was ready in
advance and was being cared for at home, destined
in due time to manifest himself to them and to take
a part in their show—in fact, to be cast for the
leading role.

When at length it was time to begin, he contrived an ingenious ruse. Going at night to the
foundations of the temple which were just being
excavated, where a pool of water had gathered
which either issued from springs somewhere in the
foundations themselves or had fallen from the sky,
he secreted there a goose-egg, previously blown,
which contained a snake just born ; and after burying
it deep in the mud, he went back again. In the
morning he ran out into the market-place naked,
wearing a loin-cloth-(this too was gilded), carrying
his falchion, and tossing his unconfined mane like
a devotee of the Great Mother in the frenzy.
Addressing the people from a high altar upon which
he had climbed, he congratulated the city because it
was at once to receive the god in visible presence.
The assembly—for almost the whole city, including
women, old men, and boys, had come running—
marvelled, prayed and made obeisance. Uttering a
few meaningless words like Hebrew or Phoenician,
he dazed the creatures, who did not know what he


 

was saying save only that he everywhere brought
in Apollo and Asclepius.

Then he ran at full speed
to the future temple, went to the excavation and
the previously improvised fountain-head of the
oracle, entered the water, sang hymns in honour of
Asclepius and Apollo at the top of his voice, and
besought the god, under the blessing of Heaven, to
come to the city. Then he asked for a libationsaucer, and when somebody handed him one, deftly
slipped it underneath and brought up, along with
water and mud, that egg in which he had immured
the god; the joint about the plug had been closed
with wax and white lead. Taking it in his hands, he
asserted that at that moment he held Asclepius!
They gazed unwaveringly to see what in the world
was going to happen; indeed, they had already
marvelled at the discovery of the egg in the water.
But when he broke it and received the tiny snake
into his hollowed hand, and the crowd saw it
moving and twisting about his fingers, they at once
raised a shout, welcomed the god, congratulated
their city, and began each of them to sate himself greedily with prayers, craving treasures, riches,
health, and every other blessing from him. But
Alexander went home again at full speed, taking
with him the new-born Asclepius, “born twice,
when other men are born but once,” whose mother
was not Coronis, by Zeus, nor yet a crow, but a
goose! And the whole population followed, all full
of religious fervour and crazed with expectations.

For some days he remained at home, expecting
what actually happened—that as the news spread,
crowds of Paphlagonians would come running in.
When the city had become over-full of people, all
of them already bereft of their brains and sense,
and not in the least like bread-eating humans, but
different from beasts of the field only in their looks,
he seated himself on a couch in a certain chamber,
clothed in apparel well suited to a god, and took
into his bosom his Asclepius from Pella, who, as I
have said, was of uncommon size and beauty. _ Coiling him about his neck, and letting the tail, which
was long, stream over his lap and drag part of its
length on the floor, he concealed only the head by
holding it under his arm—the creature would submit to anything—and showed the linen head at one
side of his own beard, as if it certainly belonged to
the creature that was in view.

Now then, please imagine a little room, not very
bright and not admitting any too much daylight ;
also, a crowd of heterogeneous humanity, excited,
wonder-struck in advance, agog with hopes. When
they went in, the thing, of course, seemed to
them a miracle, that the formerly tiny snake
within a few days had turned into so great a
serpent, with a human face, moreover, and tame!
They were immediately crowded towards the exit,
and before they could look closely were forced out
by those who kept coming in, for another dovr


 

had been opened on the opposite side as an exit.
That was the way the Macedonians did, they say,
in Babylon during Alexander’s illness, when he was
in a bad way and they surrounded the palace,
craving to see him and say good-bye. This exhibition the scoundrel gave not merely once, they say,
but again and again, above all if any rich men
were newly arrived.

In that matter, dear Celsus, to tell the truth, we
must excuse those men of Paphlagonia and Pontus,
thick-witted, uneducated fellows that they were, for
being deluded when they touched the serpent—
Alexander let anyone do so who wished—and besides saw in a dim light what purported to be its
head opening and shutting its mouth. Really the
trick stood in need of a Democritus, or even
Epicurus himself or Metrodorus, or someone else
with a mind as firm as adamant toward such
matters, so as to disbelieve and guess the truth-—
one who, if he could not discover how it went,
would at all events be convinced beforehand that
though the method of the fraud escaped him, it
was nevertheless all sham and could not possibly
happen.

Little by little, Bithynia, Galatia, and Thrace
came pouring in, for everyone who carried the news
very likely said that he not only had seen the god
born but had subsequently touched him, after he
had grown very great in a short time and had a
face that looked like a man’s. Next came paintings
and statues and cult-images, some made of bronze,
some of silver, and naturally a name was bestowed

 

upon the god. He was called Glycon in consequence of a divine behest in metre; for Alexander
proclaimed :

 Glycon am I, the grandson of Zeus, bright beacon
to mortals!

When it was time to carry out the purpose for
which the whole scheme had been concocted—that
is to say, to make predictions and give oracles
to those who sought them—taking his cue from
Amphilochus in Cilicia, who, as you know, after the
death and disappearance of his father Amphiaraus
at Thebes, was exiled from his own country, went
to Cilicia, and got on very well by foretelling the
future, like his father, for the Cilicians and getting
two obols for each prediction—taking, as I say, his
cue from him, Alexander announced to all comers
that the god would make prophecies, and named a
date for it in advance. He directed everyone to
write down in a scroll whatever he wanted and what
he especially wished to learn, to tie it up, and to
seal it with wax or clay or something else of that
sort. Then he himself, after taking the scrolls and
entering the inner sanctuary—for by that time the
temple had been erected and the stage set—proposed to summon in order, with herald and priest,
those who had submitted them, and after the god
told him about each case, to give back the scroll
with the seal upon it, just as it was, and the reply
to it endorsed upon it; for the god would reply
explicitly to any question that anyone should put.

As a matter of fact, this trick, to a man like you,
and if it is not out of place to say so, like myself
also, was obvious and easy to see through, but to
those drivelling idiots it was miraculous and almost
as good as incredible. Having discovered various
ways of undoing the seals, he would read all the
questions and answer them as he thought best.
Then he would roll up the scrolls again, seal them,
and give them back, to the great astonishment of
the recipients, among whom the comment was
frequent: “Why, how did he learn the questions
which I gave him very securely sealed with impressions hard to counterfeit, unless there was really
some god that knew everything?”

“What were his discoveries, then?” perhaps you
will ask. Listen, therefore, in order to be able to
show up such impostors. The first, my dear Celsus,
was a well-known method; heating a needle, he
removed the seal by melting through the wax
underneath it, and after reading the contents he
warmed the wax once more with the needle, both
that which was under the thread and that which
contained the seal, and so stuck it together without
difficulty. Another method was by using what they
call plaster; this is a compound of Bruttian pitch,
asphalt, pulverized gypsum, wax, and gum Arabic.
Making his plaster out of all these materials and
warming it over the fire, he applied it to the seal,
which he had previously wetted with saliva, and
took a mould of the impression. Then, since the
plaster hardened at once, after easily opening and
reading the scrolls, he applied the wax and made an
impression upon it precisely like the original, just as
one would with a gem. Let me tell you a third

 

method, in addition to these. Putting marble-dust
into the glue with which they glue books and
making a paste of it, he applied that to the seal
while it was still soft, and then, as it grows hard at
once, more solid than horn or even iron, he removed
it and used it for the impression. There are many
other devices to this end, but they need not all
be mentioned, for fear that we might seem to be
wanting in taste, especially in view of the fact that
in the book which you wrote against the sorcerers, a
very good and useful treatise, capable of preserving
common-sense in its readers, you cited instances
enough, and indeed a great many more than I
have.

Well, as I say, Alexander made predictions and
gave oracles, employing great shrewdness in it and
combining guesswork with his trickery. He gave
responses that were sometimes obscure and ambiguous, sometimes downright unintelligible, for
this seemed to him in the oracular manner. Some
people he dissuaded or encouraged as seemed best
to him at a guess. To others he prescribed medical
treatments and diets, knowing, as I said in the
beginning, many useful remedies. His “cytmides”
were in highest favour with him—a name which he
had coined for a restorative ointment compounded
of bear’s grease. Expectations, however, and




 

advancements and successions to estates he always
put off to another day, adding: “It shall all come
about when I will, and when Alexander, my prophet,
asks it of me and prays for you.”

A price had been fixed for each oracle, a drachma
and two obols. Do not think that it was low, my
friend, or that the revenue from this source was
scanty! He gleaned as much as seventy or eighty
thousand a year, since men were so greedy as to
send in ten and fifteen questions each. What he
received he did not use for himself alone nor
treasure up to make himself rich, but since he had
many men about him by this time as assistants,
servants, collectors of information, writers of oracles,
custodians of oracles, clerks, sealers, and expounders,
he divided with all, giving each one what was
proportionate to his worth.

By now he was even sending men abroad to
create rumours in the different nations in regard to
the oracle and to say that he made predictions,
discovered fugitive slaves, detected thieves and
robbers, caused treasures to be dug up, healed the
sick, and in some cases had actually raised the dead.
So there was a hustling and a bustling from every
side, with sacrifices and votive offerings—and twice as
much for the prophet and disciple of the god.
For this oracle also had come out:
 
 Honour I bid you to give my faithful servant, the prophet ; 
 No great store do I set upon riches, but much on the prophet.

When at last many sensible men, recovering, as it
were, from profound intoxication, combined against
him, especially all the followers of Epicurus, and
when in the cities they began gradually to detect
all the trickery and buncombe of the show,
he issued a promulgation designed to scare them,
saying that Pontus was full of atheists and Christians
who had the hardihood to utter the vilest abuse
of him; these he bade them drive away with
stones if they wanted to have the god gracious.
About Epicurus, moreover, he delivered himself of
an oracle after this sort; when someone asked him
how Epicurus was doing in Hades, he replied :

 With leaden fetters on his feet in filthy mire he
sitteth. 


Do you wonder, then, that the shrine waxed great,
now that you see that the questions of its visitors
were intelligent and refined? 

 
In general, the war that he waged upon Epicurus
was without truce or parley, naturally enough.
Upon whom else would a quack who loved humbug
and bitterly hated truth more fittingly make war
than upon Epicurus, who discerned the nature of
things and alone knew the truth in them? The
followers of Plato and Chrysippus and Pythagoras
were his friends, and there was profound peace with
them; but “the impervious Epicurus ’—for that is
what he called him—was rightly his bitter enemy,
since he considered all that sort of thing a laughingmatter and a joke. So Alexander hated Amastris
most of all the cities in Pontus because he knew that

 

the followers of Lepidus and others like them were
numerous in the city; and he would never deliver
an oracle to an Amastrian. Once when he did
venture to make a prediction for a senator’s brother,
he acquitted himself ridiculously, since he could
neither compose a clever response himself nor find
anyone else who could do it in time. The man complained of colic, and Alexander, wishing to direct him
to eat a pig’s foot cooked with mallow, said :

 Mallow with cummin digest in a sacred pipkin of
piglets.

Again and again, as I said before, he exhibited the
serpent to all who requested it, not in its entirety,
but exposing chiefly the tail and the rest of the body
and keeping the head out of sight under his arm.
But as he wished to astonish the crowd still more,
he promised to produce the god talking—delivering
oracles in person without a prophet. It was no
difficult matter for him to fasten cranes’ windpipes
together and pass them through the head, which he
had so fashioned as to be lifelike. Then he answered
the questions through someone else, who spoke into
the tube from the outside, so that the voice issued
from his canvas Asclepius. 
 

 
These oracles were called autophones, and were
not given to everybody promiscuously, but only to



 

those who were noble, rich, and free-handed.

For
example, the oracle given to Severianus in regard to
his invasion of Armenia was one of the autophones.
Alexander encouraged him to the invasion by saying :



 
 Under your charging spear shall fall Armenians and Parthi; 
 Then you shall fare to Rome and the glorious waters of Tiber 
 Wearing upon your brow the chaplet studded with sunbeams. 



Then when that silly Celt, being convinced, made
the invasion and ended by getting himself and his
army cut to bits by Osroes, Alexander expunged
this oracle from his records and inserted another in
its place :


 
 Better for you that your forces against Armenia march not, 
 Lest some man, like a woman bedight, despatch from his bowstring 
 Grim death, cutting you off from life and enjoyment of sunlight.

That was one of his devices, and a very clever
one—belated oracles to make amends for those in
which he had made bad predictions and missed the
mark. Often he would promise good health to sick



 

men before their demise, and when they died
another oracle would be ready with a recantation :

 
 Seek no more for assistance against thy bitter
affliction ; 
 Death now standeth in view ; ’tis beyond thy power
to’scape him.

As he was aware that the priests at Clarus and
Didymi and Mallus were themselves in high repute
for the same sort of divination, he made them his
friends by sending many of his visitors to them,
saying:

 Now unto Clarus begone, to the voice of my
father to hearken.” 

and at another time,

 Visit the fane of the Branchids and hear what the
oracle sayeth, 

and again,

 Make thy way unto Mallus and let Amphilochus
answer.

So far, we have been concerned with his doings
near the frontier, extending over Ionia, Cilicia, Paphlagonia, and Galatia. But when the renown of his
prophetic shrine spread to Italy and invaded the city
of Rome, everybody without exception, each on the
other’s heels, made haste, some to go in person,
some to send; this was the case particularly with
those who had the greatest power and the highest
rank in the city. The first and foremost of these
was Rutilianus, who, though a man of birth and




 

breeding, put to the proof in many Roman offices,
nevertheless in all that concerned the gods was very
infirm and held strange beliefs about them. If he
but saw anywhere a stone smeared with holy oil or
adorned with a wreath, he would fall on his face
forthwith, kiss his hand, and stand beside it for a
long time making vows and craving blessings from it. 

 
When this man heard the tales about the oracle,
he very nearly abandoned the office which had been
committed to him and took wing to Abonoteichus.
Anyhow, he sent one set of messengers after another,
and his emissaries, mere illiterate serving-people,
were easily deluded, so when they came back, they
told not only what they had seen but what they had
heard as if they had seen it, and threw in something
more for good measure, so as to gain favour with
their master. Consequently, they inflamed the poor
old man and made him absolutely crazy.

Having
many powerful friends, he went about not only
telling what he had heard from his messengers but
adding still more on his own account. So he flooded
and convulsed the city, and agitated most of the
court, who themselves at once hastened to go and
hear something that concerned them. 

 
To all who came, Alexander gave a very cordial
reception, made them think well of him by lavish
entertainment and expensive presents, and sent


 

them back not merely to report the answers to their
questions, but to sing the praises of the god and to
tell portentous lies about the oracle on their own
account.

At the same time, however, the plaguy
scoundrel devised a trick which was really clever
and not what one would expect of your ordinary
swindler. In opening and reading the forwarded
scrolls, if he found anything dangerous and venturesome in the questions, he would keep them himself
and not send them back, in order to hold the
senders in subjection and all but in slavery because
of their fear, since they remembered what it was
that they had asked. You understand what
questions are likely to be put by men who are rich
and very powerful. So he used to derive much gain
from those men, who knew that he had them in his
net.

I should like to tell you some of the responses
that were given to Rutilianus. Asking about his
son by a former marriage, who was then in the full
bloom of youth, he enquired who should be appointed
his tutor in his studies, The reply was:

 Be it Pythagoras ; aye, and the good bard, master
of warfare. 

Then after a few days the boy died, and Alexander
was at his wit’s end, with nothing to say to his critics,
as the oracle had been shown up so obviously. But
Rutilianus himself, good soul, made haste to defend
the oracle by saying that the god had predicted precisely this outcome, and on account of it had bidden
him to select as his tutor nobody then alive, but
rather Pythagoras and Homer, who died long ago,
with whom, no doubt, the lad was then studying

 

in Hades. What fault, then, should we find with
Alexander if he thought fit to amuse himself at the
expense of such homunculi ?

At another time, when Rutilianus enquired whose
soul he had inherited, the reply was :

 
 Peleus’ son wert thou at the first ; thereafter Menander, 
 Then what thou seemest now, and hereafter shalt turn to a sunbeam. 
 Four score seasons of life shall be given thee over a hundred. 
 





But as a matter of fact he died insane at seventy
without awaiting the fulfilment of the god’s promise !

This oracle too was one of the autophones.
When one time he enquired about getting
married, Alexander said explicitly :

 
 Take Alexander’s daughter to wife, who was born
of Selene. 
 



He had long before given out a story to the
effect that his daughter was by Selene; for Selene
had fallen in love with him on seeing him asleep
once upon a time—it is a habit of hers, you
know, to adore handsome lads in their sleep!+
Without any hesitation that prince of sages Rutilianus sent for the girl at once, celebrated his nuptials
as a sexagenarian bridegroom, and took her to wife,
propitiating his mother-in-law, the moon, with whole
hecatombs and imagining that he himself had
become one of the Celestials !

No sooner did Alexander get Italy in hand than
he began to devise projects that were ever greater
and greater, and sent oracle-mongers everywhere in

 

the Roman Empire, warning the cities to be on their
guard against plagues and conflagrations and earthquakes ; he promised that he would himself afford
them infallible aid so that none of these calamities
should befall them. There was one oracle, also an
autophone, which he despatched to all the nations
during the pestilence ; it was but a single verse :

 Phoebus, the god unshorn, keepeth off plague’s
nebulous onset. 

This verse was to be seen everywhere written
over doorways as a charm against the plague; but
in most cases it had the contrary result. By
some chance it was particularly the houses on which
the verse was inscribed that were depopulated! Do
not suppose me to mean that they were stricken on
account of the verse—by some chance or other it
turned out that way, and perhaps, too, people
neglected precautions because of their confidence in
the line and lived too carelessly, giving the oracle no
assistance against the disease because they were going
to have the syllables to defend them and “unshorn
Phoebus” to drive away the plague with his arrows!

Moreover, Alexander posted a great number of
his fellow-conspirators in Rome itself as his agents,
who reported everyone’s views to him and gave him
advance information about the questions and the
especial wishes of those who consulted him, so that
the messengers might find him ready to answer even
before they arrived !

He made these preparations to meet the situation
in Italy, and also made notable preparations at home.


 

He established a celebration of mysteries, with torchlight ceremonies and priestly offices, which was to be
held annyally, for three days in succession, in perpetuity. On the first day, as at Athens, there was
a proclamation, worded as follows: “If any atheist
or Christian or Epicurean has come to spy upon the
rites, let him be off, and let those who believe in
the god perform the mysteries, under the blessing
of Heaven.” Then, at the very outset, there was an
“expulsion,” in which he took the lead, saying:
“Out with the Christians,” and the whole multitude
chanted in response, “Out with the Epicureans!”
Then there was the child-bed of Leto, the birth of
Apollo, his marriage to Coronis, and the birth of
Asclepius. On the second day came the manifestation of Glycon, including the birth of the god.

On the third day there was the union of Podaleirius
and the mother of Alexander—it was called the Day
of Torches, and torches were burned. In conclusion
there was the amour of Selene and Alexander, and
the birth of Rutilianus’ wife. The torch-bearer and
hierophant was our Endymion, Alexander. While
he lay in full view, pretending to be asleep, there
came down to him from the roof, as if from heaven,
not Selene but Rutilia, a very pretty woman, married
to one of the Emperor’s stewards. She was
genuinely in love with Alexander and he with her ;
and before the eyes of her worthless husband there
were kisses and embraces in public. If the torches


 

had not been numerous, perhaps the thing would
have been carried even further. After a short time
Alexander entered again, robed as a priest, amid
profound silence, and said in a loud voice, over and
over again, “Hail, Glycon,” while, following in his
train, a number of would-be Eumolpids and Ceryces 
from Paphlagonia, with brogans on their feet and
breaths that reeked of garlic, shouted in response,
“Hail, Alexander!”

Often in the course of the torchlight ceremonies
and the gambols of the mysteries his thigh was
bared purposely and showed golden. No doubt
gilded leather had been put about it, which gleamed
in the light of the cressets. There was once a
discussion between two of our learned idiots in
regard to him, whether he had the soul of Pythagoras, on account of the golden thigh, or some other
soul akin to it. They referred this question to
Alexander himself, and King Glycon resolved their
doubt with an oracle :
 
 Nay, Pythagoras’ soul now waneth and other times waxeth ; 
 His, with prophecy gifted, from God’s mind taketh its issue, ; 
 Sent by the Father to aid good men in the stress of the conflict ; 
 Then it to God will return, by God’s own thunderbolt smitten.

Although he cautioned all to abstain from intercourse with boys on the ground that it was impious,
for his own part this pattern of propriety made a
clever arrangement. He commanded the cities in
Pontus and Paphlagonia to send choir-boys for three



 

years’ service, to sing hymns to the god in his
household ; they were required to examine, select,
and send the noblest, youngest, and most handsome.
These he kept under ward and treated like bought
slaves, sleeping with them and affronting them in
every way. He made it a rule, too, not to greet
anyone over eighteen years with his lips, or to
embrace and kiss him; he kissed only the young,
extending his hand to the others to be kissed by
them. They were called “those within the kiss.”

He duped the simpletons in this way from first
to last, ruining women right and left as well as
living with favourites. Indeed, it was a great thing
that everyone coveted if he simply cast his eyes
upon a man’s wife; if, however, he deemed her
worthy of a kiss, each husband thought that good
fortune would flood his house. Many women even
boasted that they had had children by Alexander,
and their husbands bore witness that they spoke the
truth !

I want to include in my tale a dialogue between
Glycon and one Sacerdos, a man of Tius, whose
intelligence you will be able to appraise from his
questions. I read the conversation in an inscription
in letters of gold, at Tius, in the house of Sacerdos.
“Tell me, Master Glycon,’ said he, “who are
you?” “I am the latter-day Asclepius,’ he
replied. “A different person from the one of
former times? What do vou mean?” “It is not
permitted you to hear that.” “How many years
will you tarry among us delivering oracles?”
“One thousand and three.” “Then where shall
you go?” “To Bactra and that region, for the
barbarians too must profit by my presence among

 

men.” ‘What of the other prophetic shrines, the
one in Didymi, the one in Clarus, and the one in
Delphi—do they still have your father Apollo as the
source of their oracles, or are the predictions now
given out there false?’”’ “This too you must not
wish to know ; it is not permitted.” “What about
myself—what shall I be after my present life ?”’
“A camel, then a horse, then a wise man and
prophet just as great as Alexander.”
That was Glycon’s conversation with Sacerdos;
and in conclusion he uttered an oracle in verse,
knowing that Sacerdos was a follower of Lepidus : 

 Put not in Lepidus faith, for a pitiful doom is
in waiting. 

That was because he greatly feared Epicurus, as I
have said before, seeing in him an opponent and
critic of his trickery.

Indeed, he seriously imperilled one of the Epicureans who ventured to expose him in the presence
of a great crowd. The man went up to him and
said in a loud voice: “Come now, Alexander! You
prevailed upon such-and-such a Paphlagonian to
put his servants on trial for their lives before the
governor of Galatia on the charge that they had
murdered his son, a student at Alexandria, But the
young man is living, and has come back alive after
the execution of the servants, whom you gave over
to the wild beasts.” What had happened was this.
The young man cruised up the Nile as far as Clysma, 
and as a vessel was just putting to sea, was induced
to join others in a voyage to India. Then because



 

he was overdue, those ill-starred servants concluded
that the young man either had lost his life during
his cruise upon the Nile or had been made away
with by brigands, who were numerous at the time ;
and they returned with the report of his disappearance. Then followed the oracle and their condemnation, after which the young man presented himself,
telling of his travels.

When he told this tale, Alexander, indignant at
the exposure and unable to bear the truth of the
reproach, told the bystanders to stone him, or else
they themselves would be accurst and would bear
the name of Epicureans. They had begun to throw
stones when a man named Demostratus who happened
to be in the city, one of the most prominent men
in Pontus, flung his arms about the fellow and
saved him from death. But he had come very
near to being overwhelmed with stones, and quite
properly! Why did he have to be the only man of
sense among all those lunatics and suffer from the
idiocy of the Paphlagonians?

That man, then, was thus dealt with. Moreover, if
in any case, when men were called up in the order of
their applications (which took place the day before
the prophecies were given out) and the herald
enquired: “Has he a prophecy for So-and-so,” the
reply came from within: “To the ravens,” nobody
would ever again receive such a person under his roof
or give him fire or water, but he had to be harried
from country to country as an impious man, an
atheist, and an Epicurean—which, indeed, was their
strongest term of abuse.

One of Alexander’s acts in this connection was
most comical. Hitting upon the “Established Beliefs’
of Epicurus, which is the finest of his books, as you
know, and contains in summary the articles of the
man’s philosophic creed, he brought it into the
middle of the market-place, burned it on fagots of
fig-wood just as if he were burning the man in
person, and threw the ashes into the sea, even
adding an oracle also:

 Burn with fire, I command you, the creed of a
purblind dotard ! 

But the scoundrel had no idea what blessings that
book creates for its readers and what peace, tranquillity, and freedom it engenders in them, liberating
them as it does from terrors and apparitions and
portents, from vain hopes and extravagant cravings,
developing in them intelligence and truth, and truly
purifying their understanding, not with torches and
squills and that sort of foolery, but with straight
thinking, truthfulness and frankness.

Of all his bold emprises, however, let me tell you
one, the greatest. Since he had no slight influence
in the palace and at court through the favour which
Rutilianus enjoyed, he published an oracle at the
height of the war in Germany, when the late
Emperor Marcus himself had at last come to grips
with the Marcomanni and Quadi. The oracle recommended that two lions be cast into the Danube
alive, together with a quantity of perfumes and


 

magnificent offerings. But it will be better to
repeat the oracle itself.

 
 Into the pools of the Ister, the stream that from Zeus taketh issue, 
 Hurl, I command you, a pair of Cybele’s faithful attendants, 
 Beasts that dwell on the mountains, and all that the Indian climate 
 Yieldeth of flower and herb that is fragrant ; amain there shall follow 
 Victory and great glory, and welcome peace in their footsteps. 
 

But when all this had been done as he had directed,
the lions swam across to the enemy territory and
the barbarians slaughtered them with clubs, thinking
them some kind of foreign dogs or wolves; and
“amain” that tremendous disaster befel our side, in
which a matter of twenty thousand were wiped [out
ata blow. Then came what happened at Aquileia,
and that city’s narrow escape from capture. To meet
this issue, Alexander was flat enough to adduce the
Delphian defence in the matter of the oracle given to
Croesus, that the God had indeed foretold victory,
but had not indicated whether it would go to the
Romans or to the enemy.

As by this time throngs upon throngs were pouring in and their city was becoming overcrowded on
account of the multitude of visitors to the shrine,
so that it had not sufficient provisions, he devised



 

the so-called “nocturnal” responses. Taking the
scrolls, he slept on them, so he said, and gave
replies that he pretended to have heard from the
god in a dream; which, however, were in most cases
not clear but ambiguous and confused, particularly
when he observed that the scroll had been sealed
up with unusual care. Taking no extra chances,
he would append at random whatever answer came
into his head, thinking that this procedure too was
appropriate to oracles; and there were certain
expounders who sat by with that in view and
garnered large fees from the recipients of such
oracles for explaining and unriddling them. Moreover, this task of theirs was subject to a levy; the
expounders paid Alexander an Attic talent each.

Sometimes, to amaze dolts, he would deliver an
oracle for the benefit of someone who had neither
enquired nor sent—who, in fact, did not exist at
all. For example:

 
 Seek thou out that man who in utmost secrecy shrouded 
 Tumbleth at home on the couch thy helpmeet Calligeneia, 
 Slave Protogenes, him upon whom thou fully reliest. 
 He was corrupted by thee, and now thy wife he corrupteth, 
 Making a bitter return unto thee for his own violation. 
 Aye more, now against thee a baneful charm they have fashioned 
 So that thou mayst not hear nor see what deeds they are doing ; 


 

 This shalt thou find on the floor, beneath thy bed, by the wall-side, : 
 Close to the head; thy servant Calypso shareth the secret.” 
 

What Democritus would not have been disturbed
on hearing names and places specified—and would
not have been filled with contempt soon afterward,
when he saw through their stratagem ?

Again, to someone else who was not there and
did not exist at all, he said in prose: “Go back;
he who sent you was killed to-day by his neighbour
Diocles, with the help of the bandits Magnus, Celer,
and Bubalus, who already have been caught and
imprisoned.”

I may say too that he often gave oracles to
barbarians, when anyone put a question in his native
language, in Syrian or in Celtic; since he readily
found strangers in the city who belonged to the
same nation as his questioners. That is why the
time between the presentation of the scrolls and
the delivery of the oracle was long, so that in the
interval the questions might be unsealed at leisure
without risk and men might be found who would be
able to translate them fully. Of this sort was the
response given to the Scythian:

 
Morphen eubargoulis eis skian chnechikrage
leipsei phaos.

Let me also tell you a few of the responses
that were given to me. When I asked whether
Alexander was bald, and sealed the question carefully and conspicuously, a “nocturnal” oracle was
appended :
 Sabardalachou malachaattealos en. 
At another time, I asked a single question in
each of two scrolls under a different name, “What
was the poet Homer’s country?” In one case,
misled by my serving-man, who had been asked why
he came and had said, “To request a cure for a
pain in the side,” he replied:

 Cytmis I bid you apply, combined with the
spume of a charger. 

To the other, since in this case he had been told
that the one who sent it enquired whether it would
be better for him to go to Italy by sea or by land,
he gave an answer which had nothing to do with
Homer:
 Make not your journey by sea, but travel afoot
by the highway.

Many such traps, in fact, were set for him by me
and by others. For example, I put a single question,
and wrote upon the outside of the scroll, following
the usual form: “Eight questions from So-and-so,”’
using a fictitious name and sending the eight
drachmas and whatever it came to besides. Rely-




 

ing upon the fee that had been sent and upon the
inscription on the roll, to the single question:
“When will Alexander be caught cheating?” he
sent me eight responses which, as the saying goes,
had no connection with earth or with heaven, but
were silly and nonsensical every one.
When he found out about all this afterward, and
also that it was I who was attempting to dissuade
Rutilianus from the marriage and from his great
dependence upon the hopes inspired by the shrine,
he began to hate me, as was natural, and to count
me a bitter enemy. Once when Rutilianus asked
about me, he replied:
 Low-voiced walks in the dusk are his pleasure,
and impious matings.

And generally, I was of course the man he most
hated.
When he discovered that I had entered the city
and ascertained that I was the Lucian of whom he
had heard (I had brought, I may add, two soldiers
with me, a pikeman and a spearman borrowed from
the Governor of Cappadocia, then a friend of mine,
to escort me to the sea), he at once sent for me
very politely and with great show of friendliness.
When I went, I found many about him; but I had
brought along my two soldiers, as luck would have
it. He extended me his right hand to kiss, as his
custom was with the public; I clasped it as if to kiss
it, and almost crippled it with a right good bite!
 

 
The bystanders tried to choke and beat me for
sacrilege ; even before that, they had been indignant
because I had addressed him as Alexander and not
as Prophet.” But he mastered himself very hand-

 

somely, held them in check, and promised that he
would easily make me tame and would demonstrate
Glycon’s worth by showing that he transformed
even bitter foes into friends. Then he removed
everybody and had it out with me, professing to
know very well who I was and what advice I was
giving Rutilianus, and saying, ‘What possessed you
to do this to me, when I can advance you tremendously in his favour?” By that time I was glad to
receive this proffer of friendship, since I saw what
a perilous position I had taken up ; so, after a little,
I reappeared as his friend, and it seemed quite a
miracle to the observers that my change of heart
had been so easily effected.

Then, when I decided to sail—it chanced that
I was accompanied only by Xenophon during my
visit, as I had previously sent my father and my
family on to Amastris—he sent me many remembrances and presents, and promised too that he
himself would furnish a boat and a crew to transport
me. I considered this a sincere and polite offer;
but when I was in mid-passage, I saw the master
in tears, disputing with the sailors, and began to be
very doubtful about the prospects. It was a fact
that they had received orders from Alexander to
throw us bodily into the sea. If that had been
done, his quarrel with me would have been settled
without ado; but by his tears the master prevailed
upon his crew to do us no harm. “For sixty years,
as you see,” said he to me, “I have led a blameless
and God-fearing life, and I should not wish, at this
age and with a wife and children, to stain my hands


 

with murder ;” and he explained for what purpose
he had taken us aboard, and what orders had been
given by Alexander.

He set us ashore at Aegiali
(which noble Homer mentions ), and then they went
back again. 

 
There I found some men from the Bosporus who
were voyaging along the coast. They were going
as ambassadors from King Eupator to Bithynia, to
bring the yearly contribution. I told them of the
peril in which we had been, found them courteous, was
taken aboard their vessel, and won safely through
to Amastris, after coming so close to losing my life. 

 
Thereupon I myself began to prepare for battle
with him, and to employ every resource in my desire
to pay him back. Even before his attempt upon
me, I detested him and held him in bitter enmity
on account of the vileness of his character. So I
undertook to prosecute him, and had many associates, particularly the followers of Timocrates, the
philosopher from Heraclea. But the then governor
of Bithynia and Pontus, Avitus, checked me, all
but beseeching and imploring me to leave off, because out of good will to Rutilianus he could not,
he said, punish Alexander even if he should find
him clearly guilty of crime. In that way my effort
was thwarted, and I left off exhibiting misplaced
zeal before a judge who was in that state of mind.

Was it not also a great piece of impudence on the
part of Alexander that he should petition the
Emperor to change the name of Abonoteichus and
call it Ionopolis, and to strike a new coin bearing
on one side the likeness of Glycon and on the other
that of Alexander, wearing the fillets of his grandfather Asclepius and holding the falchion of his
maternal ancestor Perseus?

In spite of his prediction in an oracle that he was
fated to live a hundred and fifty years and then die
by a stroke of lightning, he met a most wretched
end before reaching the age of seventy, in a manner
that befitted a son of Podaleirius; for his leg
became mortified quite to the groin and was infested
with maggots. It was then that his baldness was
detected when because of the pain he let the doctors
foment his head, which they could not have done
unless his wig had been removed.

Such was the conclusion of Alexander’s spectacular
career, and such the dénouement of the whole play ;
being as it was, it resembled an act of Providence,
although it came about by chance. It was inevitable,
too, that he should have funeral games worthy of
his career—that a contest for the shrine should
arise. The foremost of his fellow-conspirators and .
impostors referred it to Rutilianus to decide which
of them should be given the preference, should
suceeed to the shrine, and should be crowned with




 

the fillet of priest and prophet. Paetus was one of
them, a physician by profession, a greybeard, who
conducted himself in a way that befitted neither a
physician nor a greybeard. But Rutilianus, the
umpire, sent them off unfilleted, keeping the post
of prophet for the master after his departure from
this life.

This, my friend, is but a little out of a great deal ;
I have thought fit to set it down as a specimen, not
only to pleasure you as an associate and friend whom
above all others I hold in admiration for your wisdom,
your love of truth, the gentleness and reasonableness of your ways, the peacefulness of your life,
and your courtesy toward all whom you encounter,
but mostly—and this will give greater pleasure to
you also—to right the wrongs of Epicurus, a man
truly saintly and divine in his nature, who alone
truly discerned right ideals and handed them down,
who proved himself the liberator of all who sought
his converse. I think too that to its readers the
writing will seem to have some usefulness, refuting
as it does certain falsehoods and confirming certain
truths in the minds of all men of sense.