GLYCERA Thais, do you know the Acarnanian soldier, who
in the old days kept Abrotonum, and afterwards fell
in love with me—the dandy, I mean, with the fine
military cloak—or have you forgotten the fellow? 

 THAIS No, Glycera, dearie, I know him. He drank with
us last year at the harvest celebrations. But what
of it? You looked as though you had something to
tell me about him. 

 GLYCERA That nasty thing Gorgona, who pretends to be my
friend, has got her claws into him and stolen him
from me behind my back. 

 THAIS So now he won’t be visiting you any more, but
has taken Gorgona to be his mistress. 

 GLYCERA Yes, Thais, and it’s hurt me very much. 


 
 THAIS It was a dirty trick, dearie, but only to be expected;
it’s a common practice of us girls. So you
mustn’t take it too hard or blame Gorgona; for,
earlier on, Abrotonum didn’t blame you over him;
and yet you’d been friends.

But I do wonder what
this soldier man found in her, unless he’s absolutely
blind and hadn’t noticed that her hair is thin on top
and receding a long way in front; her lips are
livid and her neck’s scraggy with the veins all
standing out, and what a long nose she’s got! Her
only good point is that she’s tall and has a good
carriage and a very attractive smile. 

 GLYCERA Why, Thais, you don’t think the Acarnanian has
fallen for her beauty? Don’t you know that her
mother, Chrysarium, is a witch who knows Thessalian
spells, and can bring the moon down? Why,
they say she even flies of a night. She’s the one
who’s sent the fellow out of his senses by giving him
a drink of her brew, and now they’re making a fine
harvest out of him. 

 THAIS You’ll have your harvest too, dearie; you’ll find
someone else; let him go to the devil.

MYRTIUM So, Pamphilus, you’re planning to marry the
daughter of Philo, the shipowner. I’ve even heard


 


you’re already married. Have all your sworn oaths
and tears gone in a moment, have you forgotten your
Myrtium, and at a time like this, when I’m eight
months gone? All the good I’ve had from your
love is that you’ve given me such an enormous
belly, and I’ll soon have to bring up a child, and
that’s a terrible nuisance for a lady of my kind.
For I’m not going to expose the child, particularly
if it’s a boy, but I’ll call him Pamphilus, and keep
him to console me for my unhappy love, and one
day he’ll tell you off for your treachery to his poor
mother. I don’t think much of your bride’s looks.
I saw her the other day with her mother at the
Thesmophoria, though I didn’t know at the time
that I’d never see Pamphilus again because of her.
I think you’d better have a good look at her too,
before it’s too late, and examine her face and her
eyes; I wouldn’t like you to be vexed at the marked
steel-grey colour of her eyes, or disappointed because
they squint inwards. Better still you’ve seen your
father-in-law, Philo, and know what his face is like.
You won’t need to see the daughter after seeing him!

PAMPHILUS How long shall I have to listen to your nonsense
about young ladies and your stories of matches
with shipowning families? Do I know any bride
whether snub-nosed or pretty? Or that Philo of
Alopece—I presume you mean him—so much as
had a daughter of marriageable age? Anyway, he’s
not even on good terms with my father. I remember
he was sued by him only the other day for debt.
He owed my father a talent, I believe, but refused to


 


pay, and my father had him before the Admiralty
Court, and had the greatest difficulty in squeezing it
out of him, and didn’t get it all, he kept saying.
Even if I had decided to marry, do you think I’d
have passed over the daughter of Demeas, who was
a General last year, particularly as she was a cousin
on my mother’s side, and be marrying Philo’s
daughter instead? Wherever did you hear this
story? What empty jealous ideas have you
invented for yourself, Myrtium, that you lash out
so blindly?

MYRTIUM Then you’re not getting married, Pamphilus? 

 PAMPHILUS Are you out of your mind, Myrtium, or is it a
hang-over? Though I must say we remained quite
sober last night. 

 MYRTIUM It was Doris here who gave me this nasty shock.
I sent her out to buy some wool for the little
stranger, and to pray to Artemis to deliver me safely,
and she’d met Lesbia, she told me, and—but it’d be
better for you yourself, Doris, to tell him what you
heard, unless you made all this up. 

 DORIS Ruin take me, mistress, if I told a single lie.
When I got to the town-hall, I met Lesbia who was
all smiles and told me that our lover, Pamphilus,
was marrying Philo’s daughter. She said that if
I didn’t believe her, I was to peep into your alley and
see the garlands everywhere, the girl-pipers, the
commotion, and the people singing the wedding hymn. 


 
 PAMPHILUS Well, Doris, did you take a peep? 

 DORIS I certainly did, and I saw everything, just as she
said.

PAMPHILUS I understand how you were misled. It wasn’t all
lies that Lesbia told you, Doris. What you reported
to Myrtium was true. But you were worried
without reason, for the wedding wasn’t in our house,
but now I recall my mother’s words, when I returned
from here yesterday. “My dear Pamphilus”, she
said, “Charmides, that young fellow of the same
age as you, the son of neighbour Aristaenetus, is
getting married at last. He’s showing some sense,
but how long are you going to continue keeping a mistress
?”Listening to her on and off, I dropped off to
sleep. Then I left the house early in the morning, so
that I didn’t see anything of what Doris saw later on.
If you don’t believe me, Doris, go out again and take a
good look, not just at the lane, but at the door to
see which one has the garlands. You’ll find it
belongs to our neighbours’ house. 

 MYRTIUM You’ve saved my life, Pamphilus. I’d have
hanged myself, if anything like that had happened. 

 PAMPHILUS Such a thing could never have happened. I hope
I’ll never be so mad as to forget Myrtium, especially
now that she’s going to have my child.

MOTHER Did you take leave of your senses at the party
last night, Philinna? What came over you?
Diphilus came to me early this morning in tears, and
told me how you’d treated him. He said you were
drunk, got up and danced in the middle of the
company, though he tried to stop you, then kissed
his friend, Lamprias, and, when he showed that
he was annoyed with you, left him, went over to
Lamprias, and threw your arms round his neck.
He choked with rage, he said, at such goings on.
But even later on, I imagine, you wouldn’t sleep
with him, but left him weeping, and lay down by
yourself on the nearby pallet, singing songs, and
annoying him.

PHILINNA Of course, he didn’t tell you what he did, mother,
or you wouldn’t take the part of one who behaved
so outrageously. He left me and prattled with
Thais, Lamprias’ girl, for Lamprias himself had not
yet arrived. After he had seen that I was angry,
and I’d shown him how I disapproved of his behaviour,
he laid hold of the tip of Thais’ ear, bent
her neck, and kissed her so hard, that she could
scarcely get her lips free. I cried, but he laughed,
and whispered a lot into her ear—all of it directed
against me, no doubt—and Thais kept looking at
me, and smiling. But after they’d seen Lamprias
coming, and had at last decided they’d had enough
of kissing each other, I went in spite of it all and lay


 


by his side, so that he wouldn’t have something more
to cast up to me afterwards. Thais jumped up and
was the first to dance, with her dress pulled up high,
as if she was the only one with a pretty pair of
ankles; when she’d finished, Lamprias kept quiet
and said nothing, but Diphilus praised her to the
skies for her fine dancing and her outfit, for the
skill of her feet in keeping time with the lyre, and
for her pretty ankles, and so on ad infinitum , as if
he were praising the Sosandra of Calamis,
 
 rather
than Thais, whose appearance you know, as she
goes to the baths with us. And how she started
to mock me the next moment! “Anyone”, said
she, “who isn’t ashamed of having skinny legs will
get up and dance too.” What could I say, mother?
I got up and danced. What else was I to do? Sit
still, and prove the truth of the taunt, by allowing
Thais to be queen of the party?

MOTHER You took yourself too seriously, my dear. You
shouldn’t have let it bother you. But tell me what
happened next. 

 PHILINNA The others all praised me, but Diphilus stretched
himself on his back and went on staring at the ceiling,
till I tired and stopped. 

 MOTHER But is it true that you kissed Lamprias, and that
you went over and embraced him? Why don’t
you answer? Such conduct was past forgiving. 


 
 PHILINNA I wanted to annoy him in return. 

 MOTHER Then afterwards you wouldn’t sleep with him,
but sang songs, while he cried? Don’t you understand,
daughter, that we’re penniless? Do you
forget how much he has given us, and how we’d
have had to pass the last winter, if Aphrodite hadn’t
sent him to us? 

 PHILINNA What of it? Does that mean I’ve to put up with
such insults from him? 

 MOTHER Be angry by all means, my daughter, but don’t
insult him back. Lovers insulted love no longer,
but speak severely to themselves. You’ve always
been hard on the fellow. Remember the proverb,
and take care that we don’t strain the rope to
breaking point.

MELITTA Bacchis, do you know any old woman of the kind
called Thessalians?
 
 There are said to be a lot of
them around. They use incantations and can make
a woman to be loved, no matter how much she is
hated before. My blessings on you, if you can bring




 


one of them to me. I would gladly give up these
dresses and all this gold, if I could only see Charinus
returning to me, and hating Simiche as he now hates
me. 

 BACCHIS What’s that? Don’t you live together any more?
Has Charinus gone off to Simiche, and left you,
Melitta, you for whose sake he had to face all that
parental fury, when he refused to marry that rich
girl who, they said, brought a dowry of five talents?
I heard that from your own mouth. 

 MELITTA That’s all over now, Bacchis, and for five days
now I haven’t so much as set eyes on him, while
the gentleman in question and Simiche have been
carousing with Pammenes, his companion.

BACCHIS That is rotten for you, Melitta. But what parted
you? It must have been something serious. 

 MELITTA I can’t tell you the whole story. But the other
day, when he came back from the Piraeus—his
father had sent him there to recover some debt, I
believe—he didn’t look at me when he came in, or
take me in his arms when I ran over to him in my
usual way, but he pushed me away when I tried to
embrace him, and he said, “Go off with you to
Hermotimus, the shipowner, or read what’s written
on the walls at the Ceramicus,
 
 where your names are




 


scribbled on a tombstone.” “What Hermotimus?”
I said, “Who’s he? What tombstone do you
mean?” He wouldn’t answer or take anything
to eat, and then went to bed with his back turned to
me. You can imagine all the tricks I tried in this
situation. I tried to hug him, and to turn him to
me, and kissed his back, though he kept turned
away from me. He didn’t soften a bit, but said, “If
you bother me any more, I’ll leave this instant, even
though it is midnight.”

BACCHIS Did you know Hermotimus, though? 

 MELITTA May you see me in a more miserable state than at
present, my dear, if I know any shipowner called
Hermotimus. But next morning, as soon as the
cock crowed, he was up and away, but I remembered
his saying that the name was written on some wall
in the Ceramicus, and I sent Acis to look, but all
she could find was this, written near the Dipylon
Gate on the right as you go in; “Melitta loves
Hermotimus”, and again, a little lower down, “The
shipowner Hermotimus loves Melitta.” 

 BACCHIS Oh, those meddlesome youths! I understand it
all. Somebody wished to annoy Charinus, and
wrote it up, knowing he was jealous, and he believed
it at once. If I see him, I’ll have a word with him.
He’s a child still, and has no experience. 


 
 MELITTA Where can you see him, when he has shut himself
up with Simiche? His parents are still looking for
him at my house. But if only, Bacchis, we could
find an old woman, as I said! Her presence could
save me.

BACCHIS Well, my dearest, there is a most useful witch, a
Syrian, who’s still very fresh and firm. Once, when
Phanias was angry with me without reason, just as
Charinus is with you, she reconciled him with me
after four whole months, when I’d already despaired
of him; but he was brought back to me by her
incantations. 

 MELITTA What did she charge, if you can still remember? 

 BACCHIS She doesn’t ask a big fee, Melitta—just a drachma
and a loaf; besides that you must put out seven
obols, sulphur, and a torch along with the salt.
These are taken by the old woman; she must also
have a bowl of wine mixed, and drink it by herself.
You’ll also need something belonging to the man
himself, such as clothing or boots or a few of his
hairs or anything of that sort. 

 MELITTA I have his boots.

BACCHIS She hangs these on a peg and fumigates them with
sulphur, sprinkling salt over the fire, and mumbles


 


both your names. Then she plucks out a magic
wheel from her bosom, and whirls it round, rattling
off an incantation full of horrible outlandish names.
That’s what she did on that occasion, and shortly
afterwards, though at one and the same time his
friends told him off, and Phoebis, the lady whose
company he was keeping, pleaded desperately with
him, he returned to me; and it was mainly the
charm that brought him back. Yes, and she
impressed on me this spell for turning him against
Phoebis—to look out for any footprints she left, to
erase them, place my right foot where her left had
been, and vice versa, with feet pointing the other
way, and say, “I trample on you and am on top
of you.” These instructions I carried out. 

 MELITTA Hurry, hurry, Bacchis. Fetch the Syrian woman
at once. And you, Acis, get ready the loaf and the
sulphur and all the other things for the spell.

CLONARIUM We’ve been hearing strange things about you,
Leaena. They say that Megilla, the rich Lesbian
woman, is in love with you just like a man, that you
live with each other, and do goodness knows what
together. Hullo! Blushing? Tell me if it’s
true. 


 
 LEAENA Quite true, Clonarium. But I’m ashamed, for it’s
unnatural. 

 CLONARIUM In the name of Mother Aphrodite, what’s it all
about? What does the woman want? What do
you do when you are together? You see, you don’t
love me, or you wouldn’t hide such things from me. 

 LEAENA I love you as much as I love any woman, but
she’s terribly like a man.

CLONARIUM I don’t understand what you mean, unless she’s
a sort of woman for the ladies. They say there are
women like that in Lesbos, with faces like men, and
unwilling to consort with men, but only with women,
as though they themselves were men. 

 LEAENA It’s something like that. 

 CLONARIUM Well, tell me all about it; tell me how she made
her first advances to you, how you were persuaded,
and what followed. 

 LEAENA She herself and another rich woman, with the
same accomplishments, Demonassa from Corinth,
were organising a drinking party, and had taken me


 


along to provide them with music. But, when I had
finished playing, and it was late and time to turn in
and they were drunk, Megilla said, “Come along
Leaena, it’s high time we were in bed; you sleep
here between us.” 

 CLONARIUM And did you? What happened after that?

LEAENA At first they kissed me like men, not simply
bringing their lips to mine, but opening their mouths
a little, embracing me, and squeezing my breasts.
Demonassa even bit me as she kissed, and I didn’t
know what to make of it. Eventually Megilla,
being now rather heated, pulled off her wig, which
was very realistic and fitted very closely, and
revealed the skin of her head which was shaved close,
just as on the most energetic of athletes. This sight
gave me a shock, but she said, “Leaena, have you
ever seen such a good-looking young fellow?”
“I don’t see one here, Megilla,” said I. “Don’t make
a woman out of me,” said she. “My name is
Megillus, and I’ve been married to Demonassa here
for ever so long; she’s my wife.” I laughed at
that, Clonarium, and said, “Then, unknown to us,
Megillus, you were a man all the time, just as they
say Achilles once hid among the girls, and you have
everything that a man has, and can play the part of
a man to Demonassa?” “I haven’t got what you
mean,” said she, “I don’t need it at all. You’ll
find I’ve a much pleasanter method of my own.”


 


“You’re surely not a hermaphrodite,” said I,
“equipped both as a man and a woman, as many
people are said to be?”; for I still didn’t know,
Clonarium, what it was all about. But she said,
“No, Leaena, I’m all man.”

“Well,” I said, “I’ve
heard the Boeotian flute-girl, Ismenodora, repeating
tales she’d heard at home, and telling us how someone
at Thebes had turned from woman to man, someone
who was also an excellent soothsayer, and was,
I think, called Tiresias. That didn’t happen to you,
did it?” “No, Leaena,” she said, “I was born a
woman like the rest of you, but I have the mind and
the desires and everything else of a man.” “And
do you find these desires enough?” said I. “If
you don’t believe me Leaena,” said she, “just give
me a chance, and you’ll find I’m as good as any man;
I have a substitute of my own. Only give me a
chance, and you’ll see.”
Well I did, my dear, because she begged so hard,
and presented me with a costly necklace, and a very
fine linen dress. Then I threw my arms around her
as though she were a man, and she went to work,
kissing me, and panting, and apparently enjoying
herself immensely. 

 CLONARIUM What did she do? How? That’s what I’m
most interested to hear. 

 LEAENA Don’t enquire too closely into the details; they’re
not very nice; so, by Aphrodite in heaven, I won’t
tell you!

CROBYLE Well, Corinna, now you know that it’s by no means
as terrible as you thought for a maiden to become a
woman. You’ve been with a handsome lad, and
you’ve earned for your first fee a mina
 
 , out of which
presently I’ll buy you a necklace. 

 CORINNA Yes, mummy darling. I’d like it to have bright
red beads like the one Philaenis has. 

 CROBYLE So it shall. Let me give you the rest of my
instructions about what to do and how to behave
with the men; for we have no other means of
livelihood, daughter, and you must realise what a
miserable life we’ve had these two years since your
father died, God rest his soul. But, while he lived,
we had plenty of everything; for he was a smith
with a great name in the Piraeus, and you can hear
anyone swear there never will be another smith to
follow Philinus. After his death, first of all I sold
his tongs, his anvil and his hammer for two minae,
and that kept us for seven months; since then I’ve
barely provided a starvation diet, now by weaving,
now by spinning thread for woof or warp. I’ve fed
you and waited for my hopes to be realised.

CORINNA Do you mean the mina? 

 CROBYLE No, but I worked out that when you were as old
as you are now, it would be easy for you both to
keep me and provide yourself with clothes, that you
would be rich, and have purple dresses and maids. 

 CORINNA How so? What do you mean by that, mother? 

 CROBYLE By associating with young men, drinking and
sleeping with them for money. 

 CORINNA Like Daphnis’ daughter, Lyra? 

 CROBYLE Yes. 

 CORINNA But she’s a courtesan. 

 CROBYLE There’s nothing terrible in that. You too will be
rich just like her, and have many lovers. Why do
you weep, Corinna? Don’t you see how many
courtesans there are, how much they are in demand,


 


and what money they earn? Dear lady Adrastia,
 

I certainly know that Daphnis’ daughter wore rags
before she grew up, but you can see what a figure she
cuts now, when she goes out with her gold, her gay
dresses and her four maids.

CORINNA How did Lyra get all that? 

 CROBYLE In the first place, she dresses attractively and
looks neat; she’s gay with all the men, without
being so ready to cackle as you are, but smiles in a
sweet bewitching way; later on, she’s very clever
when they’re together, never cheats a visitor or an
escort, and never throws herself at the men. If ever
she takes a fee for going out to dinner, she doesn’t
drink too much—that’s ridiculous, and men hate
women who do—she doesn’t gorge herself—that’s
ill-bred, my dear—but picks up the food with her
finger-tips, eating quietly and not stuffing both
cheeks full, and, when she drinks, she doesn’t gulp,
but sips slowly from time to time. 

 CORINNA Even if she’s thirsty, mother? 

 

 CORBYLE Then most of all, Corinna. Also, she doesn’t talk
too much or make fun of any of the company, and
has eyes only for her customer. These are the
things that make her popular with the men. Again,
when it’s time for bed, she’ll never do anything
coarse or slovenly, but her only aim is to attract the
man and make him love her; these are the things
they all praise in her. If you can learn all this, we’ll
be just as prosperous as she is. For, in all else,
compared with her, you’re a long way—but, good
Nemesis,
 
 I won’t mention that, but only pray for
long life for you.

CORINNA Tell me, mother, are all the customers like
Eucritus, with whom I slept last night? 

 CROBYLE Not all of them; some are better. Some are
already men; some again are not at all good-looking. 

 CORINNA And must I sleep with men like that? 

 CROBYLE Certainly, daughter. They pay more, let me tell
you, while the handsome wish only to be handsome
by way of payment. You too must always think




 


of the bigger fee, if you want all the women soon to
point you out and say, “See how very rich Corinna,
Crobyle’s daughter, is, and how she’s made her
mother prosperous three times over!” What do
you say? Will you do it? I know you will, and
you’ll easily beat all the others. Now go and take a
bath, in case your boy Eucritus comes again today.
He promised he would.

MOTHER If we find another lover like Chaereas, Musarium,
we’ll have to sacrifice a white goat to earthly
Aphrodite, and a heifer to the statue of heavenly
Aphrodite in the Gardens,
 
 and offer a wreath to
Demeter, Giver of Wealth! We shall be prosperous
and more than doubly blessed! You can see how
much we’re getting from the young fellow at present!
He has never given you so much as a penny, or a
dress, or a pair of shoes, or a bottle of scent. Always
there are excuses and promises and hopes for the
distant future, and he keeps saying, “If only my
father—”
 
 or “If I get my inheritance,” or “It
will all be yours.” And you say he’s promised on
oath to make you his lawful wedded wife. 

 MUSARIUM Yes, mother, he swore by the two goddesses
 
 and
by the Protectress of Athens. 


 
 MOTHER And you believe him, of course. That’s why, the
other day when he couldn’t pay his share of the
party, you gave him your ring without telling me,
and he sold it and spent the money on drink—yes,
and the two Ionian necklaces, weighing two Darics
apiece, which Praxias, the Chian shipowner had
made in Ephesus and brought for you? Chaereas
needed to pay his contribution for a dinner with his
fellows. Need I mention your gowns and fine linen?
He has indeed been a godsend and blessing to us!

MUSARIUM But he’s handsome and smooth-chinned, says he
loves me, and cries; he’s the son of Dinomache and
Laches, the Areopagite, and says he’ll marry me,
and we’ve great hopes of him, if only the old man
will fall asleep. 

 MOTHER Well, Musarium, if we want a pair of shoes, and
the cobbler asks for two drachmas, we’ll say to him,
“We have no money, but let us give you a few
of our hopes.” We’ll say the same to the barleymerchant,
and, if we’re asked for the rent, we’ll say,
“Wait until Laches of Colyttus dies; I’ll pay you
after the wedding.” Aren’t you ashamed that
you’re the only courtesan without an earring, a
necklace, or a lace wrap?

MUSARIUM What of it, mother? Are they happier than I am
or prettier? 

 

 MOTHER No, but they’re more sensible, and know their
job; they don’t trust idle words, or young men
with promises on the tips of their tongues. But
you are constant and affectionate, and won’t have
anyone near you but Chaereas. Yes, the other day
when the Acharnian farmer came with two minas,
though he had smooth cheeks too, and money from
the wine his father had sent him to sell, you turned
up your nose at him, and slept with your Adonis,
Chaereas. 

 MUSARIUM What of it? Was I to leave Chaereas and take
that clodhopper smelling of goats? To use the
common expression, I find Chaereas smooth, and
the Acharnian a rough pig.
 

 

 MOTHER Very well, the other’s a rustic and smells nasty.
But what about Antipho, the son of MeneCrates,
who promised one mina? You wouldn’t have him
either. Wasn’t he handsome and polished and just
as young as Chaereas?

MUSARIUM But Chaereas threatened to slit the throats of
both of us, if he ever caught me with him. 


 
 MOTHER But ever so many others make that threat. Will
you, then, remain without lovers because of that,
and live a chaste life, as though you were not a
courtesan but a priestess of Demeter, Giver of Laws?
Well, I won’t say any more. It’s the Harvest Home
to-day; what has he given you for the feast? 

 MUSARIUM He has nothing to give, mummy dear. 

 MOTHER Is he the only one who hasn’t found a way of
tricking his father, or sent a slave to hoodwink him,
or begged from his mother, and threatened to sail
off to the wars, if he’s not given anything? No,
there he sits, bringing us to ruin, giving nothing
himself, and forbidding you to take from those who
will give. Do you think you’ll be eighteen for ever,
Musarium, or that Chaereas will feel the same when
he’s a rich man himself, and his mother finds him
a rich match? Do you think he’ll still remember
his tears and his kisses and his oaths, when he sees
a dowry of five talents or so? 

 MUSARIUM He will remember. I can prove it. He’s still unmarried,
and has refused to take a wife despite
all the bullying and browbeating he’s had to face. 

 MOTHER I only hope he won’t play you false. I’ll remind
you of my words, Musarium, when that day comes.

AMPELIS If a man isn’t jealous or angry, Chrysis, and never
hits you, cuts your hair off, or tears your clothes, is
he still in love with you? 

 CHRYSIS Are these the only signs of a man’s love, then? 

 AMPELIS Yes, these are the signs of a burning love. All
else, the kisses, the tears, the vows and the frequent
visits are the signs of a love that is beginning and
still growing. But the real flame comes from
jealousy. And so, if Gorgias hits you, and shows
jealousy, as you say, you may be hopeful, and should
pray that he always continues in the same way. 

 CHRYSIS In the same way? What do you mean? That
he should go on hitting me for the rest of his days? 

 AMPELIS No, but that he should be hurt, whenever you
have eyes for another man. For, unless he’s in love
with you, why should he be angry at your having
another lover? 

 CHRYSIS I haven’t one. But he wrongly imagined the rich
fellow was in love with me, just because I happened
to mention his name once.

AMPELIS That again is nice for you—having him thinking
you’re sought after by rich men. It will hurt him
the more, and make him the more eager not to be
outdone by his rivals for your affection. 

 CHRYSIS But all he does is show temper and hit me. He
never gives me anything. 

 AMPELIS He will—for he’s jealous—particularly if you hurt
him. 

 CHRYSIS Somehow you seem to want me to be hit, my dear
Ampelis. 

 AMPELIS No, Chrysis, but in my opinion that’s the way
great passions start, even though the men believe
they’re being slighted. But if a man is confident
he has you to himself, his desire for you somehow
dwindles. That’s what I tell you after twenty whole
years as a courtesan, whereas you, I think, are
eighteen or even younger. If you like, I’ll tell you
what happened to me not so very many years ago.
Demophantus, the money-lender, who lives behind
the Painted Stoa, was in love with me. He’s never
given me more than five drachmas, but regarded
himself as my master. His love was a superficial


 


thing, my dear, that never made him groan or weep
or appear at all hours at my doors, but he would
merely sleep with me at not very frequent intervals.

But, after the time when he came and I locked him
out, because I had with me Callides, the painter,
who had sent me ten drachmas, to start with he
went away abusing me. But, after many days had
passed, and there was no word from me, as I had
Callides in the house, eventually even Demophantus
began to burn and blaze with passion, and one day
he posted himself at my door and waited for it to
open. He began to weep and strike me, he threatened
to kill me, he tore my dress; there was nothing
he didn’t do, and in the end he gave me a talent and
kept me for himself alone for eight whole months.
His wife said I’d driven him mad by means of
drugs, but the only drug was his own jealousy. So,
Chrysis, you’d better use the same treatment on
Gorgias. He’ll be a rich young fellow if anything
happens to his father.

DORCAS We are ruined, mistress, ruined! Polemo has
returned from the wars a rich man, they say. I’ve
seen him myself wearing a purple-edged cloak all
done up with a clasp, and a large retinue with him.
When his friends saw him, they all flocked to him
to welcome him. Meanwhile, I’d seen following


 


behind him the servant who’d gone abroad with him
and I questioned him. I greeted him first, and then
said, “Tell me, Parmeno, how have you done?
Have you brought back anything worth while for
all that fighting?” 

 PANNYCHIS You shouldn’t have asked that right away, but
said, “Thanks be to all the gods for your safe return,
and thanks most of all to Zeus, Protector of the
Stranger, and to Athene, Goddess of War. My
mistress was always asking what you were doing
and where you were.” And it would have been a
lot better if you’d added that she was always crying
and talking of Polemo.

DORCAS I did start with all those preliminaries, but I
wouldn’t have mentioned them to you; I wanted
to tell you what I’d heard. My first words to
Parmeno were, “Well, Parmeno, were your ears
burning? My mistress was always talking of you
and weeping; particularly at times when someone
had returned from battle and there were said to be
a lot of fatal casualties, would she tear her hair, beat
her breast, and grieve at every message.” 

 PANNYCHIS Well done, Dorcas! That was just right. 

 DORCAS Then a little later I asked the questions I’ve told
you of, and he told me they’d returned in style. 


 
 PANNYCHIS What! Nothing first from him either about
Polemo talking about me or missing me or praying
he’d find me alive on his return? 

 DORCAS He did indeed say a lot to that effect; but the
main point was his news of great wealth, of gold,
raiment, servants and ivory. He told me that the
money they were bringing in silver wasn’t counted
but measured by the bushel—and there were many
bushels. Parmeno himself had on his little finger
an enormous ring with many sides, which had set
in it a jewel of three colours, the top layer being red.
Well, I left him trying to tell me how they’d crossed
the Halys, and killed someone called Tiridates, and
how Polemo had distinguished himself in the battle
with the Pisidians. I went running off to bring you
this news, so that you can think what to do in
the circumstances. If Polemo comes, as he certainly
will, once he’s rid of his acquaintances, and starts
asking questions, and finds Philostratus in the house
with us, what do you think he’ll do?

PANNYCHIS We must find some escape from this situation.
It wouldn’t be right for me to send Philostratus
away, when he gave me a talent only the other day,
and is, besides, a merchant, and promises me so
much, nor yet would it be sensible for me to shut
Polemo out, when he’s returned in such splendour.


 


Besides, he’s so jealous, I could hardly put up with
him even when he was poor. What do you think
he’ll stop at now? 

 DORCAS He’s coming. 

 PANNYCHIS I’m faint and helpless with panic. 

 DORCAS Philostratus is coming too. 

 PANNYCHIS What’s to become of me? I wish the ground
would swallow me up.

PHILOSTRATUS Why don’t we have a drink, Pannychis? 

 PANNYCHIS You’ve ruined me, fellow. Good day to you,
Polemo. It’s a long time since I’ve seen you. 

 POLEMO Who is this who’s being so familiar with you?
Can’t you speak? Very well, Pannychis, go your
own way. And here I’ve been rushing in haste from
Thermopylae for five days, all for a woman like you!
But it serves me right, though I’m grateful to think
that henceforth I’ll be free from your plundering. 

 PHILOSTRATUS Who are you, my good man? 


 
 POLEMO Polemo of the Stirian deme and the Pandionic
tribe, let me tell you. One who first was leader of a
thousand, but now has five thousand shields following
him, one who loved Pannychis, while I believed
she was still content with mortal thoughts. 

 PHILOSTRATUS But now, my good freelance, you’ll find that
Pannychis is mine. She’s had a talent from me,
and shall have another presently, as soon as I’ve
disposed of my cargo. Come with me now, Pannychis,
and leave this fellow to be colonel among
his Thracians. 

 POLEMO She’s a free woman, and will go with you only if
she wishes. 

 PANNYCHIS What am I to do, Dorcas? 

 DORCAS You’d better go in; you can’t go near Polemo
when he’s so angry, and a little jealousy will only
heighten his passion. 

 PANNYCHIS Please let’s go in, Philostratus.

POLEMO I warn you that your drinking days will end today,
or all my training in killing must go for nothing.
Call up the Thracians, Parmeno. On with them in


 


full armour, sealing off the alley with their phalanx!
Hoplites in the centre, slingers and archers on the
wings, and the rest in reserve! 

 PHILOSTRATUS You talk to us, mercenary, as though we were
babes in arms whom you wish to scare with your
idle threats. When did you ever kill so much as a
cock or see fighting? You may have been a corporal
guarding a few yards of wall, and that’s giving
you the benefit of the doubt. 

 POLEMO You’ll soon know all about it, when you see us
advancing against your unguarded flank with our
armour glittering in the sun. 

 PHILOSTRATUS Just prepare for the march and come on. Tibius
here—he’s my only retainer—and I will pelt you
with stones and potsherds and scatter you in such
panic that you won’t know where you’ve gone.

CHELIDONIUM Has young Clinias given up visiting you, Drosis?
It’s a long time since I’ve seen him at your house. 


 
 DROSIS Yes, Chelidonium. His tutor has stopped him
from coming to see me any more. 

 CHELIDONIUM Who’s he? Surely not Diotimus, the gymnastics
master? He’s a friend of mine. 

 DROSIS No, but that most accursed of Philosophers,
Aristaenetus. 

 CHELIDONIUM Do you mean the grim-looking fellow, with the
shaggy hair and bushy beard, who’s always walking
with his boys in the Painted Porch? 

 DROSIS That’s the hypocrite I mean. I’d like to see him
come to a bad end, with the hangman dragging him
along by that beard.

CHELIDONIUM Why ever did he induce Clinias to act like this? 

 DROSIS I don’t know, Chelidonium. But, although he’d
never missed a night with me, since he’d started
going with women, and I was his first woman, for
three days running now he’s not even come near our
street. Since I was upset, as somehow I’d become
rather fond of him, I sent Nebris to have a look at
him, while he was in the Agora or the Painted Porch.


 


She said she saw him walking around with Aristaenetus,
and nodded to him from a distance, but
he went red, kept his eyes down and didn’t look in
her direction again. Then they walked together to
the Academy. She followed as far as the Dipylon
Gate, but since he’d never even turned in her direction,
she came back without any definite information.
You can imagine what it’s been like for me since
that, as I can’t think what’s come over my boy!
“I can’t have annoyed him in any way?” I kept
asking myself. “Or has he fallen in love with some
other woman, and hates me now? Has his father
prevented his visiting me?” Many thoughts like
that kept coming into my poor head, but, when it
was already late in the afternoon, Dromo came with
this note from him. Take it and read it, Chelidonium,
for I believe you can read.

CHELIDONIUM Let us see. The writing’s not very clear; it’s so
slapdash that the writer was obviously in a hurry.
He says, “Heaven knows how much I loved you,
Drosis.” 

 DROSIS Alas, poor me! He didn’t even start by wishing
me well.
 
 

 CHELIDONIUM “And now I’m leaving you not because I hate you,
but because I’m forced to do so. My father has
handed me over to Aristaenetus to study philosophy




 


under him, and Aristaenetus, finding out all about
us, gave me a good telling-off, saying it was not at
all the thing for a son of Architeles and Erasiclia to
associate with a courtesan, for it was much better to
prefer virtue to pleasure.” 

 DROSIS Curse that old driveller for teaching the lad such
things! 

 CHELIDONIUM “So that I must obey him. He follows me everywhere,
and keeps a close eye on me. In fact, I’m
not allowed even to look at anyone but him. If
I live a sober life, and obey him in everything, he
promises me I’ll be completely happy, and shall
become virtuous through my training in endurance.
I’ve had the greatest difficulty in slipping away to
write this to you. I pray that you may prosper, my
dear, and never forget Clinias.”

DROSIS What do you think of the letter, Chelidonium? 

 CHELIDONIUM The rest of it might have come from a Scythian,
 

but the part about never forgetting Clinias shows
there’s still some hope. 

 DROSIS Just what I thought. In any case I’m dying of
love. But Dromo said that Aristaenetus is the sort
who’s fond of boys, and, by pretending to teach




 


them, keeps company with the handsomest youths,
and has now got Clinias on his own, and spins him
tales, promising of all things that he will make him
like a god. Besides that, he’s reading with him
amorous discourses addressed by the old Philosophers
to their pupils, and is all wrapped up in the lad.
Dromo threatened he’d tell Clinias’ father as well. 

 CHELIDONIUM I hope, Drosis, you gave Dromo a good feed. 

 DROSIS That I did, though he’ll do anything for me, even
without that; he’s another who is desperate for the
love of Nebris. 

 CHELIDONIUM Don’t worry. Everything will be all right. I
think I’ll write up on the wall in the Ceramicus,
where Architeles often takes a walk, “Aristaenetus
is corrupting Clinias”, so that we can charge
 
 to the
swift support of Dromo’s charge. 

 DROSIS How can you write it up without being seen? 

 CHELIDONIUM By night, my dear. I’ll get a bit of charcoal
somewhere. 

 DROSIS Capital, Chelidonium. If only you can help me
fight that old impostor Aristaenetus!

TRYPHENA Who ever heard of a fellow who takes out a girl,
pays her five drachmas, and then turns his back on
her in bed, weeping and groaning? I don’t think
you enjoyed the wine, or really wanted to dine alone
with me. You were crying all through dinner;
I noticed it. And now you keep on whimpering like
a baby. Why, Charmides? Don’t keep it from
me, so that I can have this further pleasure
 
 out of
the sleepless night I’ve spent with you. 

 CHARMIDES I’m dying of love, Tryphena. It’s too terrible for
me to bear any longer. 

 TRYPHENA Obviously I’m not the one you love, or you
wouldn’t show such little interest in me, and keep
pushing me away when I tried to hug you, or have
ended by placing your cloak as a barrier between us,
for fear of my touching you. But for all that tell
me who she is. Perhaps I can help you in your love,
for I know how to be of service in such matters. 

 CHARMIDES You are very well acquainted with each other;
she’s a well-known member of your profession.

TRYPHENA Tell me her name, Charmides. 

 CHARMIDES Philematium, Tryphena. 

 TRYPHENA Which one? There are two. Do you mean the
one from the Piraeus, who lost her virginity only the
other day, and is loved by Damylus, the son of one
of this year’s Generals, or the other one, the one they
call the “Trap”? 

 CHARMIDES That’s the one. I’m a poor victim that’s fallen
right into her trap. 

 TRYPHENA Then you were crying for her? 

 CHARMIDES Indeed I was. 

 TRYPHENA Have you loved for long, or was your initiation
recent? 

 CHARMIDES Far from recent; it’s almost seven whole months
since the Dionysia, and the time when I first saw her. 

 TRYPHENA Did you have a good look at her all over? Or did
you only see her face, and the parts of her body


 


immediately visible, and just as much as you should
of a woman who’s forty-five if she’s a day? 

 CHARMIDES But she swears she’ll be twenty-two next March.

TRYPHENA But which will you believe—her solemn oaths or
your own eyes? Take a close and careful look at
her temples, the only place where her hair is her own.
The rest of it is a thick wig. But along her temples
the grey hairs show pretty well all over, whenever
the dye she uses loses its effect. But why do that?
Insist on seeing her unclothed. 

 CHARMIDES Her favours to me have never extended so far. 

 TRYPHENA That’s only to be expected. She knew you’d be
revolted by her white spots,
 
 and she’s mottled like
a leopard all the way from her neck down to her
knees. Were you crying at being refused by a
woman like that? Perhaps too she was cruel and
proud to you? 

 CHARMIDES Yes, Tryphena, even though I always give her so
much; and now that I’ve found it difficult to give
her the thousand drachmas that she’s asking because
I’m dependent on a stingy father, she’s let
Moschion in, and locked me out. I wanted to get
even for that by annoying her, and so I asked you 
to accompany me. 


 
 TRYPHENA By our Lady Aphrodite, I wouldn’t have come if
I’d been warned that that was why my company
was wanted—to annoy another woman, and Philematium,
the Coffin, at that! No, I’ll be off, for this
is already the third time that the cock’s crowed.

CHARMIDES Don’t you be in such a hurry, Tryphena. If it’s
true what you tell me about her wig, her dyed hair,
and the white spots besides, I won’t be able to
look at Philematium again. 

 TRYPHENA Ask your mother, if they’ve ever been at the
baths together. Her age you can find out from your
grandfather, if he’s still living. 

 CHARMIDES Well, since she’s like that, let’s remove the barrier
this instant, snuggle up closer, kiss, and really
enjoy each other’s company. To the devil with
Philematium!

JOESSA So, Lysias, you’re turning up your nose at me?
It serves me right, seeing that I never asked money
of you, or locked you out when you came, telling


 


you I had another man with me, or forced you to
cheat your father or rob your mother to bring me
something. That’s what all the other courtesans do,
but I let you come in from the start, though you
didn’t pay me anything or contribute your share of
the meal, and I sent away ever so many lovers, as
you know, men such as Theocles, who’s an important
man in the Council at the moment, and Pasion, the
shipowner, and your companion, Melissus, though
he lost his father the other day and now has control
of the estate. But you were my only love, my
Phaon,
 
 and I wouldn’t look at anyone or have
anyone near me but only you. For I thought in my
folly that your vows were true, and for that reason
I’ve devoted myself to you and lived as chaste a life
as Penelope, though my mother shouts at me and
runs me down before her friends. But ever since
you realised that I doted on you, and you had me
under your thumb, you’ve been having jokes with
Lycena, before my very eyes, to annoy me, or at
other times praising Magidium, the harp-girl, when
we were dining together. These things make me
cry and feel insulted. Only the other day, when
you were drinking with Thraso and Diphilus, the
company also included the flute-girl Cymbalium,
and Pyrallis, whom I loathe. As you know that, I
didn’t worry particularly at your kissing Cymbalium
five times. To kiss a woman like that was an insult
to yourself! But oh! the way you kept on making
signs to Pyrallis, and would lift up your cup to her,
when you drank, and whisper in the slave’s ear, when
you returned the cup, telling him not to give anyone




 


a drink unless Pyrallis asked for one! In the end
you bit off a piece of your apple, when you saw
Diphilus was busy talking to Thraso, and, bending
forward, shot it with skilful aim into her bosom,
without any attempt to hide it from me. She kissed
it, and, dropping it between her breasts, tucked it
under her girdle.

Well, why do you act like that?
Have I ever done anything great or small to harm
or annoy you? Have I ever looked at another man?
Don’t I live only for you? There’s nothing glorious,
Lysias, in vexing like this a poor weak woman, who’s
mad with love for you. There is such a goddess as
Nemesis
 , and she sees things like this. Perhaps it
will bring you grief when you hear that I lie dead,
after hanging myself, or jumping head first into a
well, or I’ll find some other way of killing myself,
so that you won’t have the annoyance of seeing me
any more. Then you’ll be able to swagger around
with pride for a great and glorious achievement.
Why do you look at me so angrily and gnash your
teeth? If you have any complaint against me,
speak up, and let Pythias here judge between us.
Hullo? Are you going away and leaving me,
without answering? Pythias, do you see how I’m
being treated by Lysias? 

 PYTHIAS What cruelty! Even your tears don’t soften his
heart. He’s a stone, not a human being. But, if
truth must be spoken, Joessa, you spoilt him by
loving him too much, and letting him see it. You
shouldn’t make very much of him at all. Men
become proud when they see that. Stop crying,




 


poor girl; take my advice and shut him out once or
twice. Then you’ll find him burning with passion
and really mad in his turn for your love. 

 JOESSA Stop it! Don’t even say that! Me shut out
Lysias? I only hope he won’t desert me first. 

 PYTHIAS He’s coming back again. 

 JOESSA You’ve ruined us, Pythias! Perhaps he’s heard
you saying, “Shut him out!”

LYSIAS I’ve not come back because of her, Pythias, for
I wouldn’t look at her till she changes her ways, but
for your sake, so that you won’t think I’m in the
wrong and say, “Lysias is heartless.” 

 PYTHIAS Indeed that’s just what I was saying, Lysias. 

 LYSIAS So, Pythias, you expect me to put up with Joessa?
She may be all tears now, but I myself found her being
unfaithful to me and sleeping with another young
man. 

 PYTHIAS Lysias, the point is that she’s a courtesan. But
how did you catch them sleeping together? 


 
 LYSIAS It was about five days ago; yes, by Jove, five it
was, for it was the second of the month, and it’s the
seventh today. My father, knowing that I’d long
been in love with this paragon among women, had
shut me in, with instructions to the porter that he
wasn’t to open the door for me. But I, unable to
stay away from her, told Dromo to bend down along
the top of the courtyard wall at its lowest part, and
let me mount his back. In that way I’d be able to
climb up more easily. To cut my story short, I got
over the wall, came here, and found the door carefully
bolted, for it was midnight. I didn’t knock,
but gently eased the door up off its hinges, as I’d
done on earlier occasions, and, pushing it open,
entered without making a sound. Everybody was
asleep, and I felt my way along the wall till I was
at the bed.

JOESSA In Demeter’s name, what are you going to say?
I’m on tenterhooks. 

 LYSIAS When I could make out the breath of more than
one person, at first I thought Lyde was sleeping with
her. But that wasn’t so, Pythias, for, when I
touched her companion, it was a smooth-chinned,
soft-skinned man, with his head shaved, and reeking
of scent like a woman. If I’d had my sword with
me, when I’d made this discovery, believe me, I
wouldn’t have hesitated! Why are you laughing,
Pythias? Do you see anything funny in what
I say? 


 
 JOESSA Was that what annoyed you, Lysias? It was
Pythias here who was sleeping with me. 

 PYTHIAS Don’t tell him, Joessa. 

 JOESSA Why not? It was Pythias, darling. I asked her
to sleep with me, because I was miserable without
you.

LYSIAS Pythias the man with the shaved head? Has
she grown all this hair in the five days since then? 

 JOESSA She had her head shaved, because she was ill and
her hairs were falling out. But now she’s wearing
a wig. Show him, Pythias, show him I’m telling
the truth. Convince him. Take a look at the
young man, the lover of whom you were so jealous! 

 LYSIAS Well, hadn’t I good reason? Especially as I
loved you, and had touched your companion with
my own hands? 

 JOESSA Then you believe me now? Do you want me to
get my own back by annoying you? I’ve a perfect
right to be angry in my turn. 

 LYSIAS Please don’t. Let’s have some wine now, and
Pythias with us. She ought to be there when the
wine seals our truce. 


 
 JOESSA So she shall. Oh, but how I’ve suffered because
of you, Pythias, you noble young fellow! 

 PYTHIAS But I was also the one who made you friends
again, and so you mustn’t be angry with me. But
there’s one thing, Lysias. Be sure you tell nobody
about my hair.

LEONTICHUS And tell us, Chenidas, how in the battle with the
Galatians I rode out ahead of all the other cavalrymen
on my white horse, and how the Galatians for
all their courage were stricken with fear the moment
they saw me, and not one of them stood his ground.
On that occasion I hurled my lance like a javelin and
sent it through the leader of their cavalry and his
horse as well, and then turning against those of them
that still offered concerted resistance—for there were
a few still remaining who, instead of the phalanx,
had now adopted a rectangular formation—turning
against these, I drew my blade, and, charging with
all my fury, knocked over half a dozen or so of their
front rank by the onset of my horse, and, bringing
my sword down on the head of one of their captains,
I split it in two, helmet and all. The rest of you
came up, Chenidas, a little later, when the enemy
were already in flight.

CHENIDAS Yes, Leontichus, and when you fought in single
combat with the satrap in Paphlagonia, wasn’t that
another great exhibition of your prowess? 

 LEONTICHUS Thank you for reminding me of another not ignoble
exploit. The satrap, a gigantic man, and reputed
to excel all other warriors in heavy armour, despising
the Greek forces, leapt out between the two armies
and challenged all comers to offer him single combat.
All our other officers were terrified, and that included
even our General himself, though he’s a man of
spirit. At the time, you know, we were under the
command of Aristaechmus, the Aetolian, whose skill
with the javelin is unrivalled, and I was still a mere
colonel. I, however, acted boldly and shaking off
my comrades who were holding me back through
fear for me when they saw the barbarian resplendent
in his golden armour, a mighty figure with fearsome
crest, brandishing his lance—— 

 CHENIDAS I was another who was afraid on that occasion,
Leontichus, and you know how I clung to you,
begging you not to court danger ahead of us, for my
life would not have been worth living, if you had
been killed.

LEONTICHUS But I acted boldly and advanced out there,
wearing just as fine armour as the Paphlagonian, and
encased in gold from head to toe just like him, so
that a shout arose immediately, both from our men


 


and from the barbarians, for they too recognised me
by my shield in particular and by my spangles and
my crest. Tell us, Chenidas, whom did they all
think I resembled then? 

 CHENIDAS Achilles, of course, son of Peleus and Thetis. So
distinguished was your helmet, so bright your purple,
so resplendent your shield. 

 LEONTICHUS When we met, the barbarian struck first, wounding
me slightly by grazing me with his spear just above
the knee, but I drove my lance through his shield,
and penetrated right through to his chest. Then
I rushed at him, lopped off his head with my blade
without any difficulty, and returned, not only with
his arms, but carrying his head fixed on my lance,
and bathed in blood.

HYMNIS Stop, Leontichus. Your stories about yourself
are repulsive and gruesome, and no girl would ever
look again at a fellow who takes such pleasure in
bloodshed, far less drink with him, or spend the
night with him. So I’ll be off. 

 LEONTICHUS I offer you double the money. 

 HYMNIS I couldn’t bear to sleep with a murderer. 


 
 LEONTICHUS Don’t be afraid, Hymnis. These exploits are all
over and happened in Paphlagonia; for the moment
I’m at peace. 

 HYMNIS But you’re unclean, and the blood dripped over you
from his head, when you carried it on your spear.
And then you expect me to embrace and kiss a
fellow like that? May the Graces save me from
that! He’s no better than the public executioner. 

 LEONTICHUS But, if you’d seen me in heavy armour, I’m sure
you’d have fallen in love with me. 

 HYMNIS Merely to listen to you, Leontichus, makes me feel
sick and shudder and imagine I see the ghosts and
phantoms of those you butchered and particularly
of that poor captain with his head split in two.
What do you think would have happened if I’d seen
the deed itself, and the blood, and the dead bodies
lying there? I think I went faint as it was. I’ve
never to this day even seen a cock being killed. 

 LEONTICHUS Are you really so cowardly and poor-spirited,
Hymnis? I thought you’d be delighted to hear
my tale. 

 HYMNIS Keep such tales for the delight of any women
of Lemnos or daughters of Danaus
 
 you find; but




 


I’m running away to mother, while it’s still daylight.
And you’d better come with me, Grammis. Goodbye,
bravest colonel, you murderer of as many as
you choose.

LEONTICHUS Stay, Hymnis, stay.—She’s gone. 

 CHENIDAS Yes, Leontichus. You frightened the simple
young girl by brandishing your plumes and recounting
your incredible feats. I could see at once
how pale she grew before you’d finished that story
about the captain, and how she puckered her brow,
and shivered when you said you’d split his head. 

 LEONTICHUS I thought it would make me seem more attractive
to her; but you helped to spoil things for me,
Chenidas, by suggesting the single combat. 

 CHENIDAS Well, wasn’t I to help by adding my lies to yours,
when I saw why you were boasting? But you
made the story much too frightening. It was all
very well for you to cut off the head of that poor
Paphlagonian, but why did you go on to stick it on
your spear, so that the blood poured over you?

LEONTICHUS That was indeed repulsive, Chenidas; the tale
we’d made up hadn’t been at all bad up till then!
But be off with you and coax her into spending the
night with me. 


 
 CHENIDAS Am I to say, then, that your whole story was a
pack of lies, because you wished to appear a hero in
her eyes? 

 LEONTICHUS I’d be ashamed if you did. 

 CHENIDAS But that’s the only way she’ll come. You’ve only
two choices; you can either be hated and retain
your reputation for valour, or you can spend the
night with Hymnis and admit you’ve been lying. 

 LEONTICHUS Either choice goes against the grain; but I choose
Hymnis. So go, Chenidas, and tell her that I did
He, but it wasn’t all lies.

DORIO So, Myrtale, you shut the door in my face now
that I’ve Beggared myself because of you, though,
when I brought all those gifts, I was your darling,
your man, your lord, your all! But now that I’ve
been drained completely dry, and you have found
your Bithynian merchant to love you, I’m shut out
and stand before your doors in tears, while he enjoys
your kisses at night, spending the whole night alone
with you, and you say you’re about to have his child. 


 
 MYRTALE That’s what riles me most of all, Dorio—the way
you keep saying you’ve been generous to me and
have Beggared yourself for me. Just start from the
beginning and reckon up all the gifts you’ve brought
me.

DORIO An excellent idea, Myrtale; let’s do that. First,
a pair of shoes from Sicyon worth two drachmas.
Put down two drachmas. 

 MYRTALE But you spent two nights with me. 

 DORIO Then, when I came from Syria, a vase of
Phoenician perfume, also costing two drachmas,
I swear it by Poseidon. 

 MYRTALE But, when you had to sail, I gave you that little
waistcoat to wear while rowing. Epiurus, the
officer of the fo’c’sle, had left it here by mistake,
when he spent a night with me. 

 DORIO Epiurus recognised it in Samos the other day, and
got it back, though, by heaven, we had quite a fight
over it. Then I brought you onions from Cyprus,
five fish from the Nile,
 
 and four perches, on our




 


return from the Bosporus. Oh yes, and a basket
with eight ship’s loaves, and a jar of dried figs from
Caria, and another time a pair of gilded sandals from
Patara, you ungrateful creature! And I remember
the time I brought you that great cheese from
Gythium.
 
 

 MYRTALE All this comes to perhaps five drachmas, Dorio.

DORIO Oh Myrtale, I brought you all a seaman could
afford out of his pay. Recently I’ve been put in
charge of the starboard hands, and you despise me!
Not so long ago, when it was the feast of Aphrodite,
didn’t I put a silver drachma at the feet of the
goddess on your account? Then again I gave your
mother two drachmas for a pair of shoes, and many’s
the time I’ve slipped two or even four obols into the
hand of Lyde here. All these together amounted to
the whole worldly wealth of any sailor. 

 MYRTALE The onions, you mean, Dorio, and those fish from
the Nile? 

 DORIO Yes, I’d nothing more to give you. I shouldn’t
be an oarsman, if I were a man of means. Why,
I’ve never to this day brought my mother a single
head of garlic. I wish you’d told me what gifts you
had from the Bithynian. 

 MYRTALE Well, first take a look at this dress. He bought
it, and the thicker of my necklaces. 


 
 DORIO It came from him, did it? I knew you’d had it
for a long time. 

 MYRTALE No, the one you knew was much thinner, and had
no emeralds. Then there’s these earrings and that
rug, and only the other day he gave me two minas,
and paid our rent for us. That’s a little different
from sandals from Patara or Gythian cheese, or
rubbish like that!

DORIO But won’t you tell me what sort of a lover you
find him? He must be well over fifty, he’s going
thin at the front, and he has the colour of a crawfish.
And haven’t you noticed his teeth? By Castor and
Pollux, the graces have been kind to him, particularly
when he sings, and tries to show his good
taste! He’s like the proverbial donkey treating
himself to a solo on the harp. Good luck to you,
for he’s just what you deserve, and I hope your
child takes after his father! For my part I’ll find
a Delphis or a Cymbalium who’s more my own sort,
or perhaps it’ll be your neighbour who plays the pipe,
but I’ll certainly find somebody. We don’t all have
rugs or necklaces or presents of two minas to give
you. 

 MYRTALE What a lucky girl it’ll be that gets you for her
lover, Dorio! You’ll bring her onions from Cyprus,
and cheese any time you come from Gythium!

COCHLIS Why these tears, Parthenis? How did you
break these pipes you’re carrying? 

 PARTHENIS It was that soldier from Aetolia, the big fellow
who loves Crocale. He slapped me when he found
me playing at Crocale’s house, when I’d been hired by
his rival Gorgos, and bursting in smashed my pipes,
overturned the table while we were still at dinner,
and spilt the wine out of the bowl. Then he
dragged Gorgos, that poor fellow from the country,
out of the room by the hair, and both the soldier
himself—Dinomachus I think he’s called—and his
comrade, stood over him beating him up. And so
I don’t know whether the fellow will survive, Cochlis,
for blood poured in streams from his nose, and his
whole face is swollen and all black and blue.

COCHLIS Was the fellow out of his senses or was it a drunken
fit? 

 PARTHENIS It was jealousy, my dear, and excess of love.
Crocale, I believe, had asked for two talents, if he
wanted to keep her all to himself. When he refused


 


to pay, she banged the door shut in his face, so they
said, and asked in Gorgos of Oenoe, a rich farmer, an
admirer of long standing, and an excellent fellow,
drank with him and brought me in to give them
some music. The wine had begun to flow, I was
striking up one of my Lydian airs, the farmer was
just getting up to dance, Crocale was clapping, and
everything was most pleasant, when we heard
crashes and shouts, there was a battering on the front
door, and a moment later eight or nine strapping
young fellows including that yahoo
 
 came rushing in.
Well everything was turned upside down at once,
and Gorgos, as I said, was knocked about, and
kicked as he lay on the ground. Somehow Crocale
was quick enough to escape next door to Thespias’
house, but I was slapped by Dinomachus, who then
threw my broken pipes after me, and told me to “get
to blazes out of it”. Now I’m hurrying off to tell
my master about this, while the farmer is on his way
to see some friends in town, who will bring that yahoo
before the magistrates.

COCHLIS That’s the profit one may get from having these
soldiers for lovers—violence and suits in the law-courts.
Besides, though they claim to be Generals
and colonels, when the time comes to pay, they
say, “Wait for pay-day, and the time I’m paid




 


for my soldiering, and I’ll do anything you ask.”
Oh, a plague on them with their empty boasts!
I’m glad I’ve nothing at all to do with them. Give
me a fisherman or sailor or farmer of my own class,
who may have little skill in paying compliments, but
gives lots of presents. But as for these fellows who
shake their plumes and tell us all about their battles,
why, Parthenis, they’re nothing but noise!