At the behest of a dream, illustrious Quintillus,
I make you a present of the “Octogenarians.” I
had the dream and told my friends of it long since,
when you were christening your second child. At
the time, however, not being able to understand
what the god meant by commanding me to “present
you the octogenarians,” I merely offered a prayer that
you and your children might live very long, thinking
that this would benefit not only the whole human
race but, more than anyone else, me in person and
all my kin; for I too, it seemed, had a blessing
predicted for me by the god.

But as I thought the
matter over by myself, I hit upon the idea that very
likely in giving such an order to a literary man, the
gods were commanding him to present you something from his profession. Therefore, on this your
birthday, which I thought the most auspicious
occasion, I give you the men who are related to have
attained great age with a sound mind and a perfect
body. Some profit may accrue to you from the
treatise in two ways : on the one hand, encouragement
and good hopes of being able to live long yourself,
and on the other hand, instruction by examples, if
you observe that it is the men who have paid most


 

attention to body and mind that have reached an
advanced age in full health.

Nestor, you know,
the wisest of the Achaeans, outlasted three genera-
tions, Homer says:
 
and he tells us that he was
splendidly trained. in mind and in body. ‘Likewise
Teiresias the seer outlasted six generations, tragedy
says: 
and one may well believe that a man
consecrated to the gods, following a simpler diet,
lives very long.

Moreover, it is related that, owing
to their diet, whole castes of men live long like
the so-called scribes in Egypt, the story-tellers
in Syria and Arabia, and the so-called Brahmins in
India, men scrupulously attentive to philosophy.
Also the so-called Magi, a prophetic caste consecrated to the gods, dwelling among the Persians,
the Parthians, the Bactrians, the Chorasmians, the
Arians, the Sacae, the Medes and many other
barbarian peoples, are strong and long-lived, on
account of practising magic, for they diet very scrupulously.

Indeed, there are even whole nations that
are very long-lived, like the Seres, who are said to live
three hundred years: some attribute their old age to
the climate, others to the soil and still others to their
diet, for they say that this entire nation drinks
nothing but water. The people of Athos are also
said to live a hundred and thirty years, and it is
reported that the Chaldeans live more than a
hundred, using barley bread to preserve the sharpness of their eyesight. They say, too, that on
account of this diet their other faculties are more
vigorous than those of the rest of mankind.

But this must suffice in regard to the long-lived
castes and nations who are said to exist for a
very long period either on account of their soil and
climate, or of their diet, or of both. I can fittingly show
you that your good hopes are of easy attainment by
recounting that on every soil and in every clime men
who observe the proper exercise and the diet most
suitable for health have been long-lived.

I shall
base the principal division of my treatise on their
pursuits, and shall first tell you of the kings and the
generals, one of whom the gracious dispensation of a
great and godlike emperor has brought to the
highest rank, thereby conferring a mighty boon upon
the emperor’s world.
 
In this way it will be possible
for you, observing your similarity to these octogenarians in condition and fortune, to have better
expectations of a healthy and protracted old age,
and by imitating them in your way of living to
make your life at once long and healthy in a high
degree.

Numa Pompilius, most fortunate of the kings
of Rome and most devoted to the worship of the
gods, is said to have lived more than eighty years.
Servius Tullius, also a king of Rome, is likewise related
to have lived more than eighty years. Tarquinius,
the last king of Rome, who was driven into exile



 

and dwelt at Cumae, is said to have lived more than
ninety years in the most sturdy health.

These are
the kings of Rome, to whom I shall join such other
kings as have attained great age, and after them
others arranged according to their various walks of life.
In conclusion I shall record for you the other Romans .
who have attained the greatest age, adding also those
who have lived longest in the rest of Italy. The
list will be a competent refutation of those who
attempt to malign our climate here; and so we may
have better hopes for the fulfilment of our prayers
that the lord of every land and sea may reach a great
and peaceful age, sufficing unto the demands of his
world even in advanced years.

Arganthonius, king of the Tartessians, lived a
hundred and fifty years according to Herodotus the
historian and Anacreon the song-writer,
 
but some
consider this a fable. Agathocles, tyrant of Sicily,
died at ninety, as Demochares and Timaeus
 tell us.
Hiero, tyrant of Syracuse, died of an illness at the
age of ninety-two, after having been ruler for
seventy years, as Demetrius of Callatia and others
say. Ateas, king of the Scythians, fell in battle
against Philip near the river Danube at an age of
more than ninety years. Bardylis, king of the




 

Illyrians, is said to have fought on horseback in the
war against Philip in his ninetieth year. Teres,
king of the Odrysians, from what Theopompus says,
died at ninety-two.

Antigonus One-eye, son of
Philip, and king of Macedonia, died in Phrygia
in battle against Seleucus and Lysimachus, with
many wounds, at eighty-one: so we are told by
Hieronymus, who made the campaign with him.
Lysimachus, king of Macedonia, also lost his life in
the battle with Seleucus in his eightieth year, as
the same Hieronymus says. There was also an
Antigonus who was son of Demetrius and grandson
of Antigonus One-eye: he was king of Macedonia
for forty-four years and lived eighty, as Medeius and
other writers say. So too Antipater, son of Iolaus,
who had great power and was regent for many kings
of Macedonia, was over eighty when he died.

Ptolemy, son of Lagus, the most fortunate of the
kings of his day, ruled over Egypt, and at the age
of eighty-four, two years before his death, abdicated
in favour of his son Ptolemy, called Philadelphus,
who succeeded to his father’s throne in lieu of his
elder brothers.1

Philetaerus, an eunuch, secured and
kept the throne of Pergamus, and closed his life at

 

 

eighty. Attalus, called Philadelphus, also king of
Pergamus, to whom the Roman general Scipio paid
a visit, ended his life at the age of eighty-two.

Mithridates, king of Pontus, called the Founder,
exiled by Antigonus One-eye, died in Pontus at
eighty-four, as Hieronymus and other writers say.
Ariarathes, king of Cappadocia, lived eighty-two
years, as Hieronymus says: perhaps he would have
lived longer if he had not been captured in the
battle with Perdiccas and crucified.

Cyrus, king ot
the Persians in olden times, according to the Persian
and Assyrian annals (with which Onesicritus, who
wrote a history of Alexander, seems to agree) at the
age of a hundred asked for all his friends by name and
learned that most of them had been put to death by
his son Cambyses. When Cambyses asserted that he
had done this by order of Cyrus, he died of a broken
heart, partly because he had been slandered for his
son’s cruelty, partly because he accused himself of
being feeble-minded.

Artaxerxes, called the Unforgetting, against whom Cyrus, his brother, made the
expedition, was king of Persia when he died of illness
at the age of eighty-six (according to Dinon ninetyfour). Another Artaxerxes, king of Persia, who,
Isidore the Characene historian says, occupied the
throne in the time of Isidore’s fathers, was assassinated at the age of ninety-three through the
machinations of his brother Gosithras. Sinatroces,


 

king of Parthia, was restored to his country in his
eightieth year by the Sacauracian Scyths, assumed
the throne and held it seven years. Tigranes, king
of Armenia, with whom Lucullus warred, died of
illness at the age of eighty-five. Hyspausines, king
of Charax and the country on the Red Sea, fell
ill and died at eighty-five.

Tiraeus, the second:
successor of Hyspausines on the throne, died of *
illness at the age of ninety-two. Artabazus, the
sixth successor of Tiraeus on the throne of Charax,
was reinstated by the Parthians and became king
at the age of eighty-six. Cammascires, king of the
Parthians, lived ninety-six years.

Massinissa, king
of the Moors, lived ninety years. Asandrus, who,
after being ethnarch, was proclaimed king of Bosporus by the divine Augustus, at about ninety years
proved himself a match for anyone in fighting from
horseback or on foot ; but when he saw his subjects
going over to Scribonius on the eve of battle, he*
starved himself to death at the age of ninety-three.
According to Isidore the Characene, Goaesus, who
was king of spice-bearing Omania in Isidore’s time,
died of illness at one hundred and fifteen years.

These are the kings who have been recorded as
long-lived by our predecessors. Since philosophers
and literary men in general, doubtless because they too
take good care of themselves, have attained old age,


 

I shall put down those whom there is record of,
beginning with the philosophers. Democritus ot
Abdera starved himself to death at the age of one
hundred and four. ' -Xenophilus the musician, we are
told by Aristoxenus, adopted the philosophical
system of Pythagoras, and lived in Athens. more
than one hundred and five years. Solon, Thales,
and Pittacus, who were of the so-called seven wise
men, each lived a hundred years, and Zeno, the
head of the Stoic school, ninety-eight.

They say
that when Zeno stumbled in entering the assembly,
he cried out: “Why do you call me?”
 
and then,
returning home, starved himself to death. Cleanthes,
the pupil and successor of Zeno, was ninety-nine’
when he got a tumour on his lip. He was fasting
when letters from certain of his friends arrived, but
he had food brought him, did what his friends had
requested, and then fasted anew until he passed
away.

Xenophanes, son of Dexinus and disciple
of Archelaus the physicist, lived ninety-one years;
Xenocrates, the disciple of Plato, eighty-four ;
Carneades, the head of the New Academy, eightyfive ; Chrysippus, eighty-one; Diogenes of Seleucia
on the Tigris, a Stoic philosopher, eighty-eight ;
Posidonius of Apameia in Syria, naturalised in Rhodes,



 

who was at once a philosopher and a historian,
eighty-four; Critolaus, the Peripatetic, more than
eighty-two: Plato the divine, eighty-one.

Athenodorus, son of Sando, of Tarsus, a Stoic, tutor
of Caesar Augustus the divine, through whose
influence the city of Tarsus was relieved of taxation,
died in his native land at the age of eighty-two, and
the people of Tarsus pay him honour each year as a
hero. Nestor, the Stoic from Tarsus, the tutor
of Tiberius Caesar, lived ninety-two years, and
Xenophon, son of Gryllus, more than ninety.1
These are the noteworthy philosophers.

Of the historians, Ctesibius died at the age of one
hundred and four while taking a walk, according to
Apollodorus in his Chronology. Hieronymus, who
went to war and stood much toil and many wounds,
lived one hundred and four years, as Agatharchides
says in the ninth book of his History of Asia; and
he expresses his amazement at the man, because up
to his last day he was still vigorous in his marital
relations and in all his faculties, lacking none of the
symptoms of health. Hellanicus of Lesbos was
eighty-five, Pherecydes the Syrian eighty-five also,
Timaeus of Tauromenium ninety-six. Aristobulus
of Cassandria is said to have lived more than ninety
years. He began to write his history in his eightyfourth year, for he says so himself in the beginning of


 

 

the work. Polybius,son of Lycortas, of Megalopolis,
while coming in from his farm to the city, was
thrown from his horse, fell ill as a result of it, and
died at eighty-two. Hypsicrates of Amisenum, the
historian, who mastered many sciences, lived to be
ninety-two.

Of the orators, Gorgias, whom some call a
sophist, lived to be one hundred and eight, and
starved himself to death. They say that when he
was asked the reason for his great age, sound in all
his faculties, he replied that he had never accepted
other people’s invitations to dinner! Isocrates
wrote his Panegyric at ninety-six ; and at the age of
ninety-nine, when he learned that the Athenians
had been beaten by Philip in the battle of Chaeronea,
he groaned and uttered the Euripidean line

 
 When Cadmus, long agone, quit Sidon town, 
alluding to himself; then, adding, “Greece will lose
her liberty,” he quitted life. Apollodorus, the Pergamene rhetorician who was tutor to Caesar Augustus
the divine and helped Athenodorus, the philosopher
of Tarsus, to educate him, lived eighty-two years, like
Athenodorus. Potamo, a rhetorician of considerable
repute, lived ninety years.

Sophocles the tragedian swallowed a grape and
choked to death at ninety-five. Brought to trial by
his son Iophon toward the close of his life on a charge


 

of feeble-mindedness, he read the jurors his Oedipus
at Colonus, proving by the play that he was sound
of mind, so that the jury applauded him to the
echo and convicted the son himself of insanity.

Cratinus, the comic poet, lived ninety-seven years,
and toward the end of his life he produced “The
Flask” and won the prize, dying not long thereafter. Philemon, the comic poet, was ninety-seven
like Cratinus, and was lying on a couch resting.
When he saw a donkey eating the figs that had been
prepared for his own consumption, he burst into a fit
of laughter; calling his servant and telling him,
along with a great and hearty laugh, to give the
donkey also a sup of wine, he choked with his laughter
and died.1
Epicharmus, the comic poet, is also said
to have lived ninety-seven years.

Anacreon, the
lyric poet, lived eighty-five years ; Stesichorus, the
lyric poet, the same, and Simonides of Ceos more
than ninety.

Of the grammarians, Eratosthenes, son of Aglaus,
of Cyrene, who was not only a grammarian but
might also be called a poet, a philosopher and a
geometrician, lived eighty-two years.

Lycurgus,
the Spartan lawgiver, is said to have lived eighty-five
years.

These are the kings and the literary men whose
names I have been able to collect. As I have
promised to record some of the Romans and the
Italians who were octogenarians, I will set them
forth for you, saintly Quintillus, in another treatise,
if it be the will of the gods,