INTRODUCTION 
 
					This is at best a summary of one of Plutarch's lost
					essays, and it may well be that we have only part of
					the summary. Bernardakis believes that the beginning is wanting, and even for a summary the end, as
					we have it, appears somewhat abrupt.
					The Old Comedy of the fifth century b.c., whose
					chief representative is, and always was, Aristophanes,
					with its brilliant wit, occasionally beautiful poetry,
					biting invective, unrestrained ribaldry, and unashamed indecency, was followed in the fourth
					century, after the brief vogue of the Middle Comedy,
					by the New Comedy, whose chief representative is
					Menander. The New Comedy abstained from
					politics, indulged in no personal invective, was indecent only by innuendo, and produced dramas in
					which the life of the times was reflected somewhat
					after the manner of modern society plays. Plutarch not unnaturally preferred Menander's polished
					comedies of character to the boisterous wit and
					humour of Aristophanes, and he seems to have had
					no appreciation of the earlier dramatist's vigour or
					of his poetic imagination.

... In general he much prefers Menander, and
					in particular he adds what follows:
				 
 
					 Coarseness, he says, in words, vulgarity and
						ribaldry are present in Aristophanes, but not at all
						in Menander; obviously, for the uneducated, ordinary
						person is captivated by what the former says, but
						the educated man will be displeased. I refer to
						antitheses and similar endings and plays on words.
						For of these Menander does make use with proper
						consideration and rarely, believing that they should
						be treated with care, but Aristophanes employs
						them frequently, inopportunely, and frigidly; for
						his punning is applauded, he says, in
					 
 because he soused the bankers -
					 
 Though they never were that but damn curs, 
 
 
					and
					
					 
					
					
					 This fellow blows an ill north-east or calumny, 
 
					and
					 Give him a belly-punch in his bowels and guts, 
 
					and
					 By laughter driven I soon shall be in Laughter-town, 
 
					and
					 
 Whatever shall I do to you, you wretched pot,
					 
 When gone the way of pots? 
 
 
					and
					 
 Since, women, what he does to us are evils wild,
					 
 For one who e'en himself in the wild-greens market grew, 
 
 
					and
					 But look, the moths have eaten up my plumes entire, 
 
					and
					
					 
					
					
					 
 
 	 Lam. I say, bring here my shield's round orb all Gorgon-faced. 
					 
 
 	 Dic. I say, hand me a flat-cake's orb all faced with cheese, 
 
 
					and many things of the same sort. Moreover, in his
					diction there are tragic, comic, pompous, and prosaic
					elements, obscurity, vagueness, dignity, and elevation, loquacity and sickening nonsense. And with
					all these differences and dissimilarities his use of
					words does not give to each kind its fitting and appropriate use; I mean, for example, to a king his
					dignity, to an orator his eloquence, to a woman her
					artlessness, to an ordinary man his prosaic speech,
					to a market-lounger his vulgarity; but he assigns to
					his characters as if by lot such words as happen to
					turn up, and you could not tell whether the speaker
					is son or father, a rustic or a god, or an old woman
					or a hero.

But Menander's diction is so polished and its
					ingredients mingled into so consistent a whole that,
					although it is employed in connexion with many
					emotions and many types of character and adapts
					itself to persons of every kind, it nevertheless appears
					as one and preserves its uniformity in common and
					familiar words in general use; but if the action
					should anywhere call for strange and deceptive
					language and for bluster, he opens, as it were, all
					the stops of his flute, but then quickly and plausibly
					closes them and brings the sound back to its natural
					quality. And although there have been many noted
					artisans, no shoemaker ever made the same shoe, no
					
					 
					
					
					mask-maker the same mask, and no tailor the same
					cloak, that would be appropriate at the same time
					for man and woman and youth and old man and
					domestic slave; but Menander so blended his diction
					that it comports with every nature, disposition, and
					age, and he did this although he entered upon his
					career while still a young man and died at the height
					of his powers as playwright and poet, when, as
					Aristotle says, writers make the greatest progress in
					the matter of diction. If, therefore, we were to
					compare Menander's earliest dramas with those of
					his middle and final periods, we should perceive from
					them how many qualities he would, had he lived
					longer, have added to these.

Some dramatists write for the common people,
					and others for the few, but it is not easy to say which
					of them all is capable of adapting his work to both
					classes. Now Aristophanes is neither pleasing to
					the many nor endurable to the thoughtful, but his
					poetry is like a harlot who has passed her prime and
					then takes up the role of a wife, whose presumption
					the many cannot endure and whose licentiousness
					and malice the dignified abominate. But Menander,
					along with his charm, shows himself above all satisfying. He has made his poetry, of all the beautiful
					works Greece has produced, the most generally
					accepted subject in theatres, in discussions, and at
					banquets, for readings, for instruction, and for
					dramatic competitions. For he shows, indeed, what
					the essence and nature of skill in the use of language
					really are, approaching all subjects with a persuasiveness from which there is no escape, and controlling
					
					 
					
					
					every sound and meaning which the Greek language
					affords. For what reason, in fact, is it truly worth
					while for an educated man to go to the theatre,
					except to enjoy Menander? And when else are
					theatres filled with men of learning, if a comic
					character has been brought upon the stage? And at
					banquets for whom is it more proper for the festive
					board to yield its place and for Dionysus to waive his
					rights ? And just as painters, when their eyes are
					tired, turn to the colours of flowers and grass, so to
					philosophers and men of learning Menander is a rest
					from their concentrated and intense studies, inviting
					the mind, as it were, to a meadow flowery, shady, and
					full of breezes.

Although the city produced in that whole
					period many excellent performers of comedy, only
					Menander's comedies contain an abundance of salty
					wit and merriment, which seem like the salt 
					derived from that sea out of which Aphroditê
					was born. But the witticisms of Aristophanes are
					bitter and rough and possess a sharpness which
					wounds and bites. And I do not know wherein his
					vaunted cleverness resides, whether in his words
					or his characters. Certainly even whatever he
					imitates he makes worse; for with him roguishness
					is not urbane but malicious, rusticity not simple but
					silly, facetiousness not playful but ridiculous, and love
					
					 
					
					
					not joyous but licentious. For the fellow seems to
					have written his poetry, not for any decent person,
					but the indecent and wanton lines for the licentious,
					the slanderous and bitter passages for the envious
					and malicious.