DORIS A good-looking lover they say you have, Galatea,
in this Sicilian shepherd who’s so mad about you! 

 GALATEA None of your jokes, Doris. He’s Poseidon’s son,
whatever he looks like. 

 DORIS What of it? Though it was a son of Zeus himself
that had so wild and hairy an appearance and, most
hideous thing of all, only one eye, do you think his
birth would help him to be any better-looking? 

 GALATEA His wild and hairy appearance, as you call it, isn’t
ugly. It’s manly. And his eye goes very nicely
with his forehead, and it sees just as well as if it
were two. 

 DORIS My dear Galatea, from the way you’re praising
him, it looks as if your Polyphemus is more loved
than loving.

GALATEA That’s not true; but the way you all criticise
him annoys me. If you ask me, I think you’re
jealous of the day when, looking after his sheep,
he caught sight of us from his watch-point, as we
were playing on the shore at the foot of Etna,
where there’s a long stretch of beach between the
mountain and the sea. He didn’t even look at you,
but thought me the prettiest of us all, and was all
eye for me and me only. That’s what’s annoying
you; because it proves that I’m better than any
of you, and that I deserve to be loved. None of
you got so much as a glance. 

 DORIS Do you think people should be jealous of you, just
because a shepherd with bad eyesight thought you
pretty? Anyhow, what could he see to praise in
you but your white skin? And he only likes that,
I imagine, because he’s used to cheese and milk, and
so thinks everything like them pretty. .

Apart from
all that, any time you want to find out what your
face really looks like, take a peep into the water
from a rock when it’s calm and look at yourself.
You’re nothing but white skin. Nobody thinks
much of that, unless there’s some rosy colour as well
to show it off. 

 GALATEA Still, though I am unrelieved white, I have got a
lover, even if it’s only Polyphemus. But not one of
you has any shepherd or sailor or boatman to admire
her. Besides, Polyphemus is musical.

DORIS You’d better not talk about that, Galatea. We
heard his singing the other day, when he came serenading
you. Gracious Aphrodite! Anyone would
have taken it for the braying of an ass. And as
for the lyre itself! What a thing it was! The
fleshless skull of a stag! Its horns served as the
arms of the lyre and he’d joined them with a yoke,
and fitted on his strings, without bothering to twist
them round a peg, so that his performance was
scarcely tuneful or harmonious, with him roaring
away himself in one key, and his lyre accompanying
him in another. So we just couldn’t help laughing
at such attempts at a love song. For even Echo,
who’s such a chatterbox, wouldn’t so much as
answer his bellowing, but was ashamed to be caught
imitating such a rough, ridiculous song.

And your
Prince Charming was carrying in his arms as his
little plaything a bear-cub just as hairy as himself.
Who wouldn’t envy you such a lover, Galatea? 

 GALATEA Well, Doris, let us see your own lover. Obviously
he’s handsomer, more musical and a better player of
the harp. 

 DORIS I’ve not got one. I don’t pride myself on being
a charmer. But as for a fellow like your Cyclops,
that smells as rank as any he-goat, and, by all accounts,
eats his meat raw, and makes a meal of
visiting strangers—may you keep him for yourself,
and ever return his affection.

CYCLOPS What terrible treatment, father, I’ve had from
that foreigner, curse him! Made me drunk and
blinded me, setting on me in my sleep! 

 POSEIDON Who dared to do that, Polyphemus? 

 CYCLOPS At first he called himself Noman, but once he’d
escaped and was out of range, he said his name was
Odysseus. 

 POSEIDON I know whom you mean—the fellow from Ithaca.
He was sailing back from Troy. But how did he
manage it, for he’s no hero?

CYCLOPS When I got back from the pastures, I caught quite
a few of them in my cave, obviously with designs on
my flocks. For after I’d put the lid on my doorway—I’ve
a huge rock for that—and had got my fire
going with a tree I had with me from the mountain,
I saw them, though they were trying to hide. I
grabbed a few of them and ate them up, as was only
natural, seeing that they were robbers. Then that
out-and-out scoundrel, be his name Noman or
Odysseus, gave me a drink which he’d drugged. It
tasted and smelt nice, but was right treacherous
and landed me in a heap of trouble. For the


 


moment I’d drunk it, everything seemed to whirl
round and round, and the cave itself started to turn
upside down, and I began to lose my bearings,
 
 and
in the end was overcome by sleep. And he, after
sharpening that stake, yes, and making it red-hot in
the fire, blinded me while I was asleep, and it’s
thanks to him that you’ve a blind son, Poseidon.

POSEIDON How soundly you must have slept, my son, if you
didn’t jump up while he was blinding you! But
how did Odysseus escape? I’m sure he couldn’t
have moved the rock from the doorway. 

 CYCLOPS No, I did that myself; I thought it’d be easier
for me to catch him as he went out. I sat down by
the doorway, with my hands stretched out to feel
for them. It was only my sheep I let out to the
pasture, and I told my ram everything he’d to do
for me.

POSEIDON I see it all. They slipped out under your sheep.
But you should have called in the other Cyclopes to
look for him. 

 CYCLOPS So I did, father, and they came. But when they
asked the name of the fellow responsible for the trick,
and I said it was Noman, they thought I was out of
my mind and went off home. Thus he outwitted
me by that name, curse him. But what’s annoyed
me most of all, is that he taunted me with my
misfortune and said, “Not even your father,
Poseidon himself, will be able to cure you”. 


 
 POSEIDON Cheer up, son. I’ll punish him. I’ll teach him
that, though I can’t cure blindness, I do have control
over the fortunes of sailors. He’s still at sea,
remember.

POSEIDON What’s all this, Alpheus? When you run into
the sea, you’re the only one that doesn’t mix with
the salt water like all the other rivers! You don’t
disperse and give yourself a rest, but go through
the sea without disintegrating, and keep your water
fresh! You dive right down like a gull or a heron, and
hurry on, I don’t know where, undiluted and pure.
I suppose you’ll pop up again somewhere and show
yourself once more. 

 ALPHEUS It’s a matter of love, Poseidon; so no questions,
please; you’ve been in love often enough
yourself. 

 POSEIDON Is it a woman you love, Alpheus, or a Nymph or
a Nereid from the sea? 


 
 ALPHEUS No, Poseidon, a fountain. 

 POSEIDON And where on earth does she have her waters? 

 ALPHEUS In an island—in Sicily; they call her Arethusa.

POSEIDON I know Arethusa, and she’s not at all bad-looking.
She’s translucent and gushes up pure. Her water
makes a pretty picture along with her pebbles, all
of it gleaming above them like silver. 

 ALPHEUS You certainly do know my fountain, Poseidon.
Well, I’m off to her. 

 POSEIDON Off with you, then, and good luck in your love.
But tell me, where did you see her? You’re from
Arcadia, and she’s at Syracuse. 

 ALPHEUS I’m in a hurry, Poseidon, and you’re delaying me
with these pointless questions. 

 POSEIDON Well spoken. Away with you to your beloved,
come up from the sea, mingle with your fountain
and become one water.

MENELAUS I’m willing to believe you turn into water,
Proteus, since you come from the sea, and I can even
put up with your becoming a tree, and even your
changing into a lion is not quite beyond the bounds
of belief—but that you can actually become fire,
although you live in the sea, I find quite amazing
and incredible. 

 PROTEUS Well you mustn’t, Menelaus, for it’s true enough. 

 MENELAUS I saw it with my own eyes. But I’ll tell you what
I think. I think it’s all a trick, and you cheat the
eyes of the onlookers, and don’t turn into any of
these things.

PROTEUS How could there be any deception when everything’s
so clearly visible? Weren’t your eyes open
when you saw all my changes? If you don’t
believe it, and think it’s all a fraud and an optical
illusion, just try touching me with your hand, my
fine fellow, when I turn myself into fire. That will
teach you whether I’m only to be seen with the eyes
or can burn as well. 

 MENELAUS That would be dangerous, Proteus. 


 
 PROTEUS I don’t suppose you’ve ever seen an octopus,
Menelaus, or know what happens to that sort of fish? 

 MENELAUS I have seen one, but please tell me what happens
to it.

PROTEUS Whenever it goes to a rock and puts its suckers on
it, clinging tight with the full length of its arms, it
makes itself just like that rock, changing its colour
to match it; thus it escapes the notice of fishermen,
by blending with its surroundings, thereby remaining
inconspicuous and looking just like the
stone. 

 MENELAUS So people say. But your goings on, Proteus, are
much harder to believe. 

 PROTEUS I don’t know what else will convince you, Menelaus,
if you won’t believe your own eyes. 

 MENELAUS I admit I saw it. But it’s quite miraculous for
one and the same person to be fire and water.

POSEIDON It’s greatly to the credit of you dolphins, that
you’ve always been kind to men. Long ago you
caught up Ino’s son
 
 after his fall with his mother
from the Scironian cliffs, and carried him to the
Isthmus. And now one of you has picked up this
harper from Methymna,
 
 and swum away with him
to Taenarum, robes and harp and all, stopping those
seamen from murdering him. 

 DOLPHIN Don’t be surprised, Poseidon, that we’re kind to
men. We were men ourselves, before we became
fishes. It wasn’t very nice of Dionysus to change
our shape after he’d beaten us in that sea-battle;
he ought merely to have reduced us to submission
as he did to all the others. 

 POSEIDON But what’s the true story about Arion, my dear
dolphin?

DOLPHIN Periander was fond of him, I believe, and would
be continually sending for him to perform. But
when the tyrant had made him a rich man, Arion
became eager to sail off home to Methymna and show
off his riches. So he embarked on a passage-boat,





 


but the crew were scoundrels, and, when he let
them see that he had a great deal of gold and silver
with him, they plotted against him in mid Aegean.
But—I heard it all, for I was swimming alongside the
ship—he said to them, “Since your minds are made
up, at least allow me to put on my robes and sing my
own dirge, and then I’ll be willing to throw myself
into the sea.” The crew agreed; he dressed up and
sang a beautiful song, and jumped into the sea to
ensure a quick death if nothing else. But I caught
him up, and put him on my back and swam all
the way to Taenarum with him. 

 POSEIDON Your love of music does you great credit. You
paid him well for the song you heard.

POSEIDON Let this strait, where the girl
 
 fell from the skies,
be called Hellespont after her. You, Nereids, take
the body to the Troad, so that it can be buried by
people there. 

 AMPHITRITE Please not that, Poseidon, but let her be buried
here in the sea named after her. We feel very sorry
for the pitiable way she was treated by her
step-mother.
 
 


 
 POSEIDON That would be wrong, Amphitrite, and it’s not quite
the thing either to leave her lying here under the sand;
no, she’ll be buried, as I said, in the Troad or the
Chersonese. She’ll find it no small consolation that,
before long, the same thing will happen to Ino;
she’ll be pursued by Athamas, and plunge into the sea
with her child
 
 in her arms from the heights of Cithaeron
where a ridge runs down into the sea. But we
must save Ino to please Dionysus; for she was his
nurse and his nanny.

AMPHITRITE You shouldn’t save a bad woman like that! 

 POSEIDON But, Amphitrite, we mustn’t offend Dionysus. 

 NEREIDS But what came over her that she fell from the
ram, while Phrixus, her brother, is having a safe ride? 

 POSEIDON That’s natural; he’s a young man and can withstand
the speed; but she has no experience, and
when she got on that strange mount, and looked down
into the gaping depths beneath her, she was terrified,
and, overcome at the same time by the heat, and
growing dizzy at the speed of the flight, lost hold
of the ram’s horns, to which she’d been clinging, and
fell into the sea. 


 
 NEREIDS But shouldn’t Nephele, her mother, have helped
her when she was falling? 

 POSEIDON Yes, indeed, but Fate is far stronger than Nephele.

PANOPE Did you see, Galene, what Discord did yesterday
at the banquet in Thessaly, because she wasn’t
invited? 

 GALENE I wasn’t with you people in person at the banquet.
For Poseidon had told me, my dear Panope, to keep
the sea calm while it lasted. But what did the
absent Discord do? 

 PANOPE Thetis and Peleus had already left and gone to
their chamber, escorted by Amphitrite and Poseidon.
Meanwhile Discord had crept in unseen by all—that
was easy enough, with the guests drinking, applauding,
or listening to Apollo’s playing or the Muses’
singing—and she threw a beautiful apple amongst
the guests—an apple of solid gold, my dear, with
the inscription “For the queen of Beauty”. The
apple rolled, as if aimed, to where Hera, Aphrodite


 


and Athena were at table.

Then Hermes picked it
up, and read out the inscription, but we Nereids
held our tongues. What could we do when such
august ladies were present? Each of them laid
claim to the apple, insisting it should rightly be hers ,
and it would have come to blows, if Zeus hadn’t
parted them, saying, “I won’t judge this matter
myself”,—though they kept insisting he should—“but
you go to Priam’s son
 
 on Ida. He knows
how to decide between beauties, for he’s a connoisseur
of beauty; his verdict is bound to be
right.” 

 GALENE And what have the goddesses done, Panope? 

 PANOPE They’ll be going to Ida today, I believe, and we’ll
soon have a messenger with news of the winner. 

 GALENE I can tell you that now. Only Aphrodite can
win, if she competes—unless the umpire is very 
short-sighted.

TRITON Poseidon, there’s a girl who comes to Lerna for
water every day—ever such a pretty little thing.
I don’t know that I ever saw a prettier girl. 


 
 POSEIDON Free, do you say, Triton, or a serving water-girl? 

 TRITON No servant, but a daughter of that Egyptian.
She’s another of those fifty sisters, and is called
Amymone. I asked after her name and family.
Danaus brings up his daughters the hard way, and
teaches them to fend for themselves, sending them
for water and training them not to shirk hard work.

POSEIDON Does she come all that long way from Argos to
Lerna alone? 

 TRITON Indeed she does, and Argos is a pretty thirsty
 

place, as you know, so that she must for ever be
carrying water. 

 POSEIDON My dear fellow, I’m really excited at what you’ve
told me about her. Let’s go and find her. 

 TRITON Let’s do that. It’s just the time for her to be
getting her water. She must be about halfway to
Lerna by now. 

 POSEIDON Then get the horses into my chariot, or rather,
since it takes too long harnessing the horses and
getting the chariot ready, fetch me a quick dolphin.
Riding on that , I’ll be able to get away most quickly. 


 
 TRITON Look, here’s the fastest dolphin you have. 

 POSEIDON Capital. Let’s be on our way; you can swim
alongside, my good fellow. . . . Well, now that
we’re at Lerna, I’ll lie in wait here somewhere, and
you’ll have to keep a look-out, and when you see her
coming— 

 TRITON Here she is now, not far off.

POSEIDON She is pretty, my dear fellow, a real beauty. We
must get hold of her. 

 AMYMONE Where are you carrying me off to, fellow? You’re
a kidnapper, that’s what you are. I’ve an idea
Uncle Egyptus sent you. I’m going to scream for
my father. 

 TRITON Silence, Amymone, it’s Poseidon. 

 AMYMONE Why do you say Poseidon? Why this force,
fellow? Why are you dragging me into the sea?
Oh, dear me, I’ll drown if I go under. 

 POSEIDON Don’t worry, you’re in no danger. I’ll give the
rock a tap with my trident near the beach, and start


 


a fountain that will have your name. You’ll be
happy, and, unlike any of your sisters, you won’t
have to carry water after death.

IRIS That wandering island,
 
 Poseidon, which was
broken off from Sicily, and is still propelling itself
about under water—Zeus says you are to make it
stop now, and bring it into view. You are to fix it
quite securely, and make it stand firm, clearly
visible
 
 from now on in the middle of the Aegean.
He wants it for something. 

 POSEIDON It will be done, Iris. But what use will it be to
him by coming to light and ceasing its seafaring? 

 IRIS Leto must be delivered upon it. She’s already in
distress from her birth pangs. 

 POSEIDON What of it? Hasn’t heaven room enough for
bearing children? If not heaven, couldn’t all the
earth accommodate her for the birth? 


 
 IRIS No, Poseidon. Hera has laid the earth under
strict oath not to give Leto anywhere for her travail;
thus this island is not bound by the oath, for it was
not visible.

POSEIDON I see. Stop still, island. Come up again from
the deep, and drift below the surface no more.
Remain in a fixed position, and receive, most lucky
of islands, my brother’s two children, the most
beautiful of all the gods. And you, Tritons, give
Leto passage to the island, and let all be calm. And
the moment the babes are born, they’ll pursue the
serpent that’s now maddening Leto with fright, and
exact vengeance for their mother. And you, Iris,
go and tell Zeus that all is ready. Delos is stationary.
Let Leto come now and have her children.

XANTHUS Take me to you, Sea, for I’ve suffered terribly.
Please put a stop to my burning wounds. 

 SEA What’s this, Xanthus? Who has burnt you? 

 XANTHUS Hephaestus. See how I’ve been charred to
cinders all over, poor thing that I am, and am at
boiling point. 


 
 SEA Whatever made him attack you with his fire? 

 XANTHUS It’s all because of the son of Thetis
 
 here. He
was butchering the Phrygians, and I begged him to
relent from his anger, but he wouldn’t; he only
blocked up my stream with their bodies. Out of
pity for the poor wretches, I attacked him, hoping
to swallow him in a flood, and frighten him away
from them.

Then Hephaestus, happening to be
near, attacked me, with all the fire he had in his
forge it seemed to me, yes, with all his fire in Etna,
and burnt my elms and tamarisks, roasting my
unhappy fish and my eels, and making me myself
bubble all over, and nearly dry all up. You can
see the state I’m in from my burns. 

 SEA You’re muddy and hot, Xanthus, as is only
natural, what with the blood from the bodies and
the heat from that fire you’ve been talking about—and
quite right too, when you had the cheek to attack
my grandson
 
 though he was the son of a Nereid! 

 XANTHUS Was it wrong for me, then, to feel sorry for my
neighbours of Phrygia? 


 
 SEA Or wrong for Hephaestus to be sorry for Thetis’
son, Achilles?

SOUTH WIND Is it true, Zephyrus, about Zeus and this heifer
 

that Hermes is escorting by sea to Egypt? Did he
fall for her and have his way with her? 

 WEST WIND Yes, Notus; only she wasn’t a heifer then, but the
daughter of Inachus, the river. But now Hera, in
her jealousy, has turned her into this, because she
saw Zeus was very much in love with her. 

 SOUTH WIND Is he still in love with her now she’s a heifer? 

 WEST WIND Very much so, my good fellow. That’s why he’s
sent her to Egypt, and told us he doesn’t want any
rough seas, until she swims across, so that, when
she has her baby there—she’s expecting at the
moment—both mother and child
 
 may become
gods.

SOUTH WIND The heifer a god? 


 
 WEST WIND Indeed she will be. According to Hermes, she’ll
have power over those at sea and be our mistress,
choosing for herself which of us to send out or to
stop from blowing. 

 SOUTH WIND In that case we’d better be attentive to her, if
she’s now our mistress. Then we’ll be sure of her
good-will. 

 WEST WIND But look, she’s over now, and has swum ashore.
See how she no longer walks on all fours, but has
been straightened up by Hermes and changed back
again into a most attractive woman. 

 SOUTH WIND How very strange, Zephyrus. No horns now, or
tail or cloven hooves, but instead a lovely girl. But
what’s come over Hermes, that he’s changed himself
and given up his own fine face for that of a dog
 
 ? 

 WEST WIND Let’s not be inquisitive. He knows his business
better than we do.

DORIS Why are you crying, Thetis? 


 
 THETIS Oh, Doris, I’ve just seen a lovely girl
 
 put into a
box by her father along with her newborn baby.
 
 He
told his sailors to take the box and, when well away
from land, to drop it into the sea, so that the mother
should be killed, poor thing, herself and her baby. 

 DORIS Why, sister? Please tell me, if you have any
definite information. 

 THETIS I have the whole story. Because she was ever so
beautiful, her father Acrisius locked her up in a
brazen room to keep her away from lovers. Then—I
can’t say whether it’s true but it’s what they say—Zeus
turned himself into gold and came pouring
through the roof at her, and she received the god in
her bosom as he came showering down, and became
pregnant. When her father found out, the cruel,
jealous old creature flew into a temper and, thinking
she’d had a lover, threw her into the box just after
her baby was born.

DORIS And what did she do, Thetis, when they were
putting her there? 

 THETIS She kept quiet about herself, submitting to her
sentence, but she kept pleading for her child’s life,





 


weeping and showing it to its grandad, for it was a
lovely baby. And it, unaware of its troubles, was
looking at the sea with a smile on its face. Remembering
them brings tears again to my eyes. 

 DORIS You’ve made me weep, too. But are they dead
now? 

 THETIS Oh, no! The box is still floating round Seriphos,
and keeping them alive and safe. 

 DORIS Well, why don’t we save them by bringing them
into the nets of these fishermen here from Seriphos?
They’ll be sure to pull them up and save them. 

 THETIS A good idea, let’s do that. I wouldn’t like the
mother to die, or the baby either. It’s so pretty.

ENIPEUS I won’t mince words, Poseidon. Your behaviour’s
been disgraceful—tricking my sweetheart
 

by impersonating me, and leading the child astray.
She thought I was doing it and submitted. 


 
 POSEIDON You were so proud and so slow, Enipeus. A
pretty girl like that came to you every day, dying
of love, and you wouldn’t look at her, but enjoyed
tormenting her! She would wander about your
banks, putting her feet in and washing sometimes,
praying for your love, but you always turned up
your nose at her.

ENIPEUS Even if I did, what right had you to forestall me
and steal her love, pretending to be Enipeus rather
than Poseidon, and winning a simple girl like Tyro
by a trick? 

 POSEIDON It’s too late to be jealous now, Enipeus. You
despised her before. Tyro’s suffered no harm. She
thought it was you. 

 ENIPEUS Oh, no! When you left her, you said you were
Poseidon, and that upset her very much. It was
unfair to me, too, for you to enjoy pleasures that
should be mine, making a blue wave arch above
you and hide you both, and making love to the girl
in my place. 

 POSEIDON Yes, but only because you didn’t want her,
Enipeus.

TRITON Your monster of the deep, my dear Nereids, the
one of you sent against Andromeda, the daughter of
Cepheus, didn’t harm the girl, as you’ve been
thinking it would, but is now dead itself. 

 NEREIDS Who killed it, Triton? Did Cepheus set the girl
there like a bait, and then attack and kill it, after
lying in wait for it with a large force? 

 TRITON No. But I imagine, Iphianassa, you all know
what happened to Perseus, Danae’s child, whom his
mother’s father threw into the sea in a chest with his
mother, and you saved out out of pity. 

 IPHIANASSA I know whom you mean. He must be a young
man by now, and a very fine handsome fellow. 

 TRITON It was he who killed the monster. 

 IPHIANASSA Why, Triton? He shouldn’t have paid us in this
coin for saving him.

TRITON I’ll tell you everything, just as it happened. He
was sent against the Gorgons, to carry out a task
for the king.
 
 But when he reached Libya— 

 IPHIANASSA How did he do it, Triton? By himself? Did
he take others to help him? Otherwise it’s a
difficult journey. 

 TRITON He went through the air. Athena had given him
wings on his feet. Well, when he’d reached where
they lived, they must all have been asleep, and
Perseus cut off Medusa’s head and flew away. 

 IPHIANASSA How could he see? They are not for the eye to
behold. Anyone who sees them won’t see anything
afterwards. 

 TRITON Athena held up her shield—I heard him describe
it to Andromeda and later to Cepheus—and let him
see the reflection of Medusa on that bright shield as
though on a mirror; then, looking at the reflection,
he caught her hair in his left hand, and holding his
scimitar in his right, cut off her head, and flew away
before her sisters woke up.

When he was at the
Ethiopian shore here, and now flying low, he saw
Andromeda lying fastened to a projecting rock—ye
gods, what a beautiful sight she was!—with her




 


hair let down, but largely uncovered from the breasts
downwards. At first he pitied her fate and asked
the reason for her punishment, but little by little he
succumbed to love, and decided to help, since she had
to be saved. So when the monster came—a fearsome
sight it was too!—to gulp her down, the young
man hovered above it with his scimitar unsheathed,
and, striking with one hand, showed it the Gorgon
with the other, and turned it into stone. At one
and the same time was the monster killed, and most
of it, all of it that faced Medusa, petrified. Then
Perseus undid the maiden’s chains, and supported
her with his hand as she tip-toed down from the
slippery rock. Now he’s marrying her in Cepheus’
palace and will take her away to Argos, so that,
instead of dying, she’s come by an uncommonly
good marriage.

IPHIANASSA I, for one, am not sorry to hear it. What harm
did the girl do to us, if her mother was always
boasting and claiming to be more beautiful than we
are? 

 DORIS Well that way as a mother she would have suffered
through her daughter. 

 IPHIANASSA Let’s forget all that, Doris, if a barbarian woman’s
talk has been too big. She’s paid us penalty enough
by being frightened for her daughter. So let’s accept
the marriage with a good grace.

WEST WIND I’ve never seen a more magnificent pageant on the
sea, ever since I began to live and blow. Didn’t you
see it, Notus? 

 SOUTH WIND What pageant do you mean, Zephyrus? Who
were in it? 

 WEST WIND You missed a most delightful spectacle, the like
of which you’ll never see again. 

 SOUTH WIND Well, I was at work about the Red Sea, and I blew
also over the parts of India near the coast. So I’ve
no idea what you’re talking about. 

 WEST WIND But you do know Agenor of Sidon? 

 SOUTH WIND Yes, Europa’s father. Of course I do. 

 WEST WIND I’ll tell you something about the girl herself. 

 SOUTH WIND Not that Zeus has long been in love with her?
I’ve known that for ages. 


 
 WEST WIND Well, you may know about his love, but let me
now tell you what followed.

Europa in her play
had come down to the beach with her companions,
and Zeus took the shape of a bull, and started playing
with them, looking magnificent, for he was all white
with nice curly horns and gentle eyes. Well, he too
started skipping about on the beach, and bellowed
most charmingly, so that Europa even dared to
climb up on to him. Thereupon Zeus galloped off to
the sea with her on his back, plunged in and began to
swim; she was quite terrified, and clutched his horn
with her left hand so as not to slip off, while she held
her robe down against the wind with her right
hand.

SOUTH WIND Indeed a delightful spectacle for you, my dear
Zephyrus—a real love-scene! Zeus swimming along
and carrying off his beloved! 

 WEST WIND But what followed was far more delightful, Notus.
The sea became waveless at once, and draping
herself in calm, made herself smooth; we all kept
quiet, and followed beside them, just watching what
was going on, while the Loves fluttered alongside
just above the sea, occasionally just touching the
water with their feet, carrying lighted torches, and
singing the marriage hymn, and the Nereids, coming


 


to the surface, rode alongside on dolphins, clapping
their hands, pretty well half-naked. The Tritons
and all other creatures of the sea that do not frighten
the eye, were dancing round the girl. Poseidon
astride his car, with Amphitrite beside him, was
driving in front, delighted to lead the way for his
brother as he swam. To cap all, two Tritons were
carrying Aphrodite reclining on a shell, and sprinkling
all manner of flowers over the bride.

This went
on all the way from Phoenicia to Crete; but when he
set foot on his island, the bull was no more to be
seen, but Zeus took Europa’s hand and led her to the
cave on Mount Dicte—blushing she was, and looking
on the ground, for now she knew why she was being
carried off. But we each assailed a different part of
the sea, and stirred up the waves. 

 SOUTH WIND How lucky you are, Zephyrus to have seen all that!
All I saw was griffins and elephants and black men.