Argument 
 After the disaster of Chaeronea the Athenian people passed a decree forbidding persons to leave the city or to remove their wives or children. Now a certain Leocrates left the city and, after going to Rhodes and later Megara , returned to Athens . He made no secret of his story and so was accused of treason by Lycurgus. The case must be classified as an instance of contradictory definition, since Leocrates admits that he left the city but denies that he betrayed it. Others class it as an instance of conjecture as to intention, since it is admitted that the accused left the city, while his purpose in leaving it is doubtful: did he wish to be a traitor or only to trade? Others think it an instance of counterplea, since he claims that he left the city not with treasonable intentions but for commerce. The subject matter resembles that of the speech against Autolycus.

Justice towards you, Athenians, and reverence for the
 gods, shall mark the opening of my speech against Leocrates, now here on trial; so may
 Athena and those other gods and heroes whose statues are erected in our city and the
 country round receive this prayer. If I have done justly to prosecute Leocrates, if he
 whom I now bring to trial has been a traitor to their temples, shrines and precincts, a
 traitor to the honors which your laws ordain and the sacrificial rituals which your
 ancestors have handed down,

may they make me on this day, in the interest of the city and its people, a worthy
 accuser of his crimes; and may you, who in your deliberation now are defending your
 fathers, wives and children, your country and your temples, who hold at the mercy of your
 vote one who has betrayed all these things, be inexorable judges, now and in future,
 towards all who break the laws on such a scale as this. But if the man whom I am now
 bringing to trial neither betrayed his country nor forsook his city and its temples, I
 pray that he may be saved from danger by the gods and you, the members of the jury.

Gentlemen, it is a privilege for the city to have within
 it those who prosecute transgressors of the law, and I could wish to find among the public
 an appropriate sense of gratitude. In fact the opposite is true, and anyone who takes the
 personal risk of unpopularity for our common good is actually regarded as an interferer
 rather than a patriot, which makes neither for justice nor the state’s advantage. For the
 things which in the main uphold our democracy and preserve the city’s prosperity are three
 in number:

first the system of law, second the vote of the jury, and third the method of prosecution
 by which the crimes are handed over to them. The law exists to lay down what must not be
 done, the accuser to report those liable to penalties under the law, and the juryman to
 punish all whom these two agencies have brought to his attention. And thus both law and
 jury’s vote are powerless without an accuser who will hand transgressors over to them.

I myself, Athenians, knew that Leocrates avoided the dangers to which his country called
 him and deserted his fellow citizens. I knew that he had utterly disregarded your
 authority and was chargeable with all the articles of the indictment. Therefore I
 instituted these proceedings. It was not out of hatred in the least nor with the slightest
 wish to be contentious that I undertook this trial; but I thought it monstrous to allow
 this man to push into the market place and share the public sacrifices, when he had been a
 disgrace to his country and to you all.

A just citizen will not let private enmity induce him to start a public prosecution
 against one who does the state no harm. On the contrary, it is those who break his
 country’s laws whom he will look on as his personal enemies; crimes which affect the
 public will, in his eyes, offer public grounds for enmity towards the criminals.

All public trials should therefore rank as important, but
 particularly this present one, in which you are about to cast your vote. For when you give
 a verdict on a charge of illegal proposals you merely rectify one single error, and in
 preventing the intended measure your scope depends upon the extent to which the decree in
 question will harm the city. But the present case is not concerned with some trifling
 constitutional issue, nor yet with a moment of time; our city’s whole life is at stake,
 and this trial will leave a verdict to posterity to be remembered for all time.

So dangerous is the wrong which has been done and so far-reaching that no indictment
 adequate could be devised, nor have the laws defined a punishment for the crimes. What
 punishment would suit a man who left his country and refused to guard the temples of his
 fathers, who abandoned the graves of his ancestors and surrendered the whole country into
 the hands of the enemy? The greatest and final penalty, death, though the maximum
 punishment allowed by law, is too small for the crimes of Leocrates.

The reason why the penalty for such offences, gentlemen, has never been recorded is not
 that the legislators of the past were neglectful; it is that such things had not happened
 hitherto and were not expected to happen in the future. It is therefore most essential
 that you should be not merely judges of this present case but lawmakers besides. For where
 a crime has been defined by some law, it is easy, with that as a standard, to punish the
 offender. But where different offences are not specifically included in the law, being
 covered by a single designation, and where a man has committed crimes worse than these and
 is equally chargeable with them all, your verdict must be left as a precedent for your
 successors.

I assure you, gentlemen, that if you condemn this man you will do more than merely punish
 him; you will be giving all younger men an incentive to right conduct. For there are two
 influences at work in the education of the young: the punishments suffered by wrongdoers
 and the reward available to the virtuous. With these alternatives before their eyes they
 are deterred by fear from the one and attracted by desire for honor to the other. You must
 therefore give your minds to the trial on hand and let your first consideration be
 justice.

In my speech also justice shall come first; on no occasion
 will I have recourse to falsehoods or irrelevance. Most of the speakers who come before
 you behave in the strangest possible manner, either giving you advice from the platform on
 public affairs or wasting their charges and calumnies on any subject except the one on
 which you are going to vote. Either course is easy, whether they choose to express an
 opinion on questions about which you are not deliberating or else to invent a charge to
 which no one is going to reply.

But it is wrong that they should ask for justice from you when you give your vote and yet
 be unjust themselves in handling the prosecution. And yet the blame for this is yours,
 gentlemen; for you have granted this freedom to speakers appearing before you, although
 you have, in the council of the Areopagus, the finest model in Greece : a court so superior to others that even the men
 convicted in it admit that its judgements are just.

Let it be your pattern, and, like it, do not give way to speakers who digress from the
 point. If you take this advice, defendants will receive an unbiased hearing, accusers will
 be least able to give false information, and you will best be able to make the verdict in
 keeping with your oath. For those who have not been rightly informed cannot give their
 verdict rightly.

A further point for you to notice, gentlemen, is this: the
 trial of Leocrates is not comparable with that of other ordinary men. For if the defendant
 were unknown in Greece , your verdict, whether
 good or bad, would be a matter solely for yourselves to contemplate. But where this man is
 concerned, whatever judgement you may give will be discussed by every Greek, since it is
 common knowledge that the conduct of your ancestors was just the opposite of his. He won
 notoriety by his voyage to Rhodes and the
 discreditable report of you which he made officially to the Rhodians and to those
 merchants residing there;

merchants who sailed round the whole Greek world on their business and passed on the news
 of Athens which they had heard from Leocrates.
 It is important therefore to reach a correct verdict upon him. For you must realize,
 Athenians, that you would be held to have neglected the virtues which chiefly distinguish
 you from the rest of mankind, piety towards the gods, reverence for your ancestors and
 ambition for your country, if this man were to escape punishment at your hands.

I am asking you, Athenians, to listen to my accusation to
 the end and not to be impatient if I begin with the history of Athens at the time under discussion; you may reserve
 your anger for the men whose fault it is that I am now compelled to recall those
 happenings. After the battle of Chaeronea you all
 gathered hastily to the Assembly, and the people decreed that the women and children
 should be brought from the countryside inside the walls and that the generals should
 appoint any Athenians or other residents at Athens to defence duties as they thought fit.

Leocrates ignored all these provisions. He collected what belongings he had and with his
 slaves’ assistance placed them in the ship’s boat, the ship itself being already anchored
 off the shore. Late in the evening he went out himself with his mistress Irenis through
 the postern gate on to the open beach and sailed out to the ship. And so he disappeared, a
 deserter, untouched by pity for the city’s harbors from which he was putting out to sea,
 and unashamed in face of the walls which, for his own part, he left undefended. Looking
 back at the Acropolis and the temple of Zeus the Savior and Athena the Protectress, which
 he had betrayed, he had no fear, though he will presently call upon these gods to save him
 from danger.

He landed and entered Rhodes , where, as if he
 were bringing good news of great successes for his country, he announced that the main
 city had been captured when he left it, that the Piraeus was blockaded and that he was the only one who had escaped, feeling
 no shame at speaking of his country’s ruin as the occasion of his own safety. The Rhodians
 took his news so seriously that they manned triremes and brought in their merchantmen; and
 the traders and shipowners who had intended to sail to Athens unloaded their corn and other cargoes there, because of Leocrates.

To prove the truth of this account the clerk shall read you the evidence of all
 concerned: first the testimony of the neighbors and the men living in this district who
 know that the defendant ran away during the war and sailed from Athens , next that of the people present at Rhodes when Leocrates was delivering this news, and
 finally the evidence of Phyrcinus, whom most of you know as the accuser of Leocrates in
 the Assembly for having seriously harmed the two per cent tax in which he had an
 interest.

But before the witnesses come up I want to say a few words
 to you. You are well acquainted, gentlemen, with the tricks of defendants and with the
 requests made by others asking pardon for them. You know too well that desire for bribes
 and favors induces many witnesses to forget what they know, to fail to appear, or to
 contrive some other excuse. Ask the witnesses therefore to come up without hesitation and
 not to put offered favors before your interests and the state. Ask them to pay their
 country the debt of truth and justice which they owe and not to follow the example of
 Leocrates by failing in this duty. Otherwise let them swear the oath of disclaimer with
 their hands on the sacrifice. If they refuse both
 these alternatives, we will summons them in the interest of yourselves, our laws and our
 democracy. Read the evidence.

Evidence 
 To resume then, gentlemen. After this, time passed,
 merchant ships from Athens continued to arrive
 at Rhodes , and it was clear that no disaster had
 overtaken the city. So Leocrates grew alarmed, and embarking again, left Rhodes for Megara . He stayed at Megara for
 over five years with a Megarian as his patron, unashamed at living on the boundaries of
 Attica , an alien on the borders of the land
 that nurtured him.

He had condemned himself so finally to a lifetime of exile that he sent for Amyntas, the
 husband of his elder sister, and Antigenes of Xypete , a friend of his, to come to him from Athens , and asked his brother-in-law to buy his house
 and slaves from him, selling them to him for a talent. Out of this sum he arranged that
 his debts should be settled, his loans paid off and the balance
 restored to him.

After concluding all this business Amyntas resold the slaves himself for thirty-five
 minas to Timochares of Acharnae who had married Leocrates’ younger sister. Timochares had
 no ready money for the purchase and so drew up an agreement which he lodged with
 Lysicles and paid Amyntas interest
 of one mina. To convince you that this is fact, lest you should think it idle talk, the
 clerk shall read you the evidence relating to these points also. If Amyntas had been still
 alive I should have produced him in person; since he is not, I am summoning for you the
 men who know the facts. Please read me this evidence showing that Amyntas bought the
 slaves and house from Leocrates at Megara .

Evidence 
 Now hear how Philomelos of Cholargus and Menelaus, once an
 envoy to the King, received from Amyntas forty minas owed them. 
 Evidence 
 Please take the evidence of Timochares who bought the slaves from Amyntas for thirty-five
 minas, and also his agreement.

Evidence. Agreement. 
 You have heard the witnesses, gentlemen. What I am now
 going to say will give you good reason for indignation and hatred of this man Leocrates.
 For he was not content simply to remove his own person and his goods. There were the
 sacred images of his family which his forbears established and which, in keeping with your
 customs and ancestral tradition, they afterwards entrusted to him. These too he had sent
 to Megara . He took them out of the country
 without a qualm at the name ancestral images or at the thought that he had uprooted them
 from their country and expected them to share his exile, to leave the temples and the land
 which they had occupied and be established in a strange and uncongenial place, as aliens
 to the soil and to the rites traditionally observed in Megara .

Your fathers, honoring 
 Athena as the deity to whom their land had been allotted, called their native city
 Athens , so that men who revered the goddess
 should not desert the city which bore her name. By disregarding custom, country, and
 sacred images Leocrates did all in his power to cause even your divine protection to be
 exported. Moreover, to have wronged the city on this enormous scale was not enough for
 him. Living at Megara and using as capital the
 money which he had withdrawn from Athens he
 shipped corn, bought from Cleopatra, from
 Epirus to Leucas and from there to Corinth .

And yet, gentlemen, in cases of this sort your laws lay down the most severe penalties if
 an Athenian transports corn to any place other than your city. When therefore a man has
 been a traitor in war and has broken the laws in transporting corn, when he has had no
 regard for sacred things and none for his country or the laws, if you have him at the
 mercy of your vote, will you not execute him and make an example of him to others? If you
 do not it will show an apathy and lack of righteous indignation completely without
 parallel.

Consider these further proofs that my inquiry into this
 question has been just; for it is my opinion that in dealing with such serious crimes you
 must base your vote, not on conjecture, but on certainty; and that witnesses must prove
 their good faith before, not after, they give their evidence. I submitted to the defence a
 written challenge on all these points and demanded the slaves of Leocrates for torture,
 according to the right procedure for making challenges. Please read the challenge.

Challenge 
 You hear the challenge, gentlemen. By the very act of
 refusing to accept this Leocrates condemned himself as a traitor to his country. For
 whoever refuses to allow the testing of those who share his secrets has confessed that the
 charges of the indictment are true. Every one of you knows that in matters of dispute it
 is considered by far the justest and most democratic course, when there are male or female
 slaves, who possess the necessary information, to examine these by torture and so have
 facts to go upon instead of hearsay, particularly when the case concerns the public and is
 of vital interest to the state.

Certainly I cannot be called unjust in my prosecution of Leocrates. I was even willing at
 my own risk to let the proof rest on the torture of his male and female slaves, but the
 defendant, realizing his guilt, rejected the offer instead of accepting it. Add yet,
 gentlemen, the male and female slaves of Leocrates would have been far readier to deny any
 of the real facts than to invent lies against their master.

Apart from this, Leocrates will presently proclaim that he is a simple citizen and is
 falling a prey to the cunning of an orator and false informer. But I am sure you all know
 well the characteristic behavior of those unscrupulous men who try to lay false
 information; for when they choose their part they look for vantage-points on which to
 quibble against those on trial, whereas the man whose aims in going to law are honest, who
 brings proofs to bear against those who come under the herald’s curse, does just the opposite, as I myself
 am doing.

Look at the present case yourselves in this way. Which people could not have been misled
 by cunning or a deceptive argument? The male and female slaves. Naturally, when tortured,
 they would have told the whole truth about all the offences. But it was just these persons
 whom Leocrates refused to hand over, though they were his and no one else’s.

On the other hand which people could he probably impose upon by arguments, appealing to
 their softer side by his tears and so winning their sympathy? The jury. Leocrates, the
 betrayer of his country, has come into court with only one fear, namely that the witnesses
 who by certain proofs expose the criminal will be produced from the same household as the
 man whom they expose. What was the use of pretexts, pleas, excuses? Justice is plain, the
 truth easy and the proof brief.

If he admits that the articles of the indictment are true and right, why does he not
 suffer punishment as the laws require? But if he claims that they are false, why has he
 not handed over his male and female slaves? When a man is up for treason he should submit
 his slaves for torture, without evading a single one of the most searching tests.

Leocrates did nothing of the sort. Though he has condemned himself as a traitor to his
 country, a traitor to his gods and to the laws, he will ask you when you vote to
 contradict his own admissions and his own evidence. How can it be right, when a man has
 refused a fair offer and in many other ways also has robbed himself of the means of
 defence, for you to let him mislead your judgement on crimes to which he has confessed?

So much for the challenge and the crime. I think you have
 been shown well enough, gentlemen, that that part is beyond dispute. I want now to remind
 you what emergencies, what great dangers the city was facing when Leocrates turned traitor
 to it. Please take the decree of Hyperides, clerk, and read it.

Decree 
 You hear the decree, gentlemen. It provided that the
 Council of Five Hundred should go down to the Piraeus armed, to consult for the protection of that harbor, and that it
 should hold itself ready to do whatever seemed to be in the people’s interest. And yet, if
 the men who had been exempted from military service so that they might deliberate upon the
 city’s affairs were then playing the part of soldiers, do you think that the alarms which
 had taken hold upon the city were any trivial or ordinary fears?

Yet it was then that this man Leocrates made off himself—a runaway from the city; it was
 then that he conveyed to safety his available property and sent back for the sacred images
 of his family. To such a pitch did he carry his treason that, so far as his decision went,
 the temples were abandoned, the posts on the wall unmanned and the town and country left
 deserted.

And yet in those days, gentlemen, who would not have pitied the city, even though he were
 not a citizen but only an alien who had lived among us in previous years? Surely there was
 no one whose hatred of the people or of Athens 
 was so intense that he could have endured to see himself remain outside the army. When the
 defeat and consequent disaster had been reported to the people and the city was tense with
 alarm at the news, the people’s hope of safety had come to rest with the men of over
 fifty.

Free women could be seen crouching at the doors in terror inquiring for the safety of
 their husbands, fathers or brothers, offering a spectacle degrading to themselves and to
 the city. The men who had outlived their stength and were advanced in life, exempt by law
 from service in the field, could be seen throughout the city, now on the threshold of the
 grave, wretchedly scurrying with their cloaks pinned double round them.

Many sufferings were being visited upon the city; every citizen had felt misfortune at
 its worst; but the sight which would most surely have stirred the onlooker and moved him
 to tears over the sorrows of Athens was to see
 the people vote that slaves should be released, that aliens should become Athenians and
 the disfranchised regain their rights : the nation
 that once proudly claimed to be indigenous and free. The city had suffered a change
 indeed.

She who used once to champion the freedom of her fellow Greeks was now content if she
 could safely meet the dangers that her own defence entailed. In the past she had ruled a
 wide extent of foreign land; now she was disputing with Macedon for her own. The people whom Lacedaemonians and Peloponnesians,
 whom the Greeks of Asia used once to summon to
 their help, were now entreating men of Andros , Ceos , Troezen and Epidaurus to send them aid.

Therefore, gentlemen, if at a time of fears like these, a time of such great danger and
 disgrace, there was a deserter from the city, a mall who neither took up arms in his
 country’s defence nor submitted his person to the generals for enrollment but ran away and
 betrayed the safety of the people, what patriotic juryman with any scruples would vote for
 his acquittal? What advocate summoned into court would help a traitor to his city? He had
 not even the grace to share our grief at the misfortunes of his country, and he has made
 no contribution towards the defence of Athens 
 and our democracy.

Yet men of every age offered their services for the city’s defence on that occasion when
 the land was giving up its trees, the dead their gravestones, and the temples arms. Some
 set themselves to building walls, others to making ditches and palisades. Not a man in the
 city was idle. Leocrates did not offer himself to be enrolled for a single one of these
 tasks.

You would do well to remember this and punish with death this man who did not even deign
 to help collect the bodies or attend the funeral of those who at Chaeronea died for freedom and the safety of our people;
 for had it rested with him those men would be unburied. He was not even ashamed to pass
 their graves when he greeted their country eight years after.

I wish to say a few words more about these men, gentlemen,
 and I ask you to listen and not regard such pleas as out of keeping with public trials.
 For the praise of brave men provides an unanswerable refutation of all whose conduct is
 opposed to theirs. And it is fair too that that praise which is to them the only reward
 for danger should be remembered at the public trials in which the entire city shares,
 since it was for her safety as a whole that they forfeited their lives.

Those men encountered the enemy on the borders of Boeotia , to fight for the freedom of Greece . They neither rested their hopes of safety on city walls nor
 surrendered their lands for the foe to devastate. Believing that their own courage was a
 surer protection than battlements of stone, they held it a disgrace to see the land that
 reared them wasted. And they were right. Men do not hold their foster parents so dear as
 their own fathers, and so towards countries which are not their own but which have been
 adopted during their lifetime they feel a weaker loyalty.

In such a spirit did these men bear their share of dangers with a courage unsurpassed;
 but their prowess was not equalled by their fortune. For they have not lived to reap the
 enjoyment of their valor; they died and have bequeathed their glory in its stead.
 Unconquered, they fell at their posts in the defence of freedom,

and if I may use a paradox but one which yet conveys the truth, they triumphed in their
 death. For liberty and courage, the prizes offered to brave men in war, are both in the
 possession of the dea neither can we say that men have been defeated whose spirits did not
 flinch at the aggressor’s threat. For it is only those who meet an honorable end in war
 whom no man justly could call beaten, since by the choosing of a noble death they are
 escaping slavery. The courage of these men has made this plain. They alone among us all
 held in their persons the liberty of Greece .

For at the very moment when they passed away her lot was changed to servitude. With the
 bodies of these men was buried the freedom of every other Greek, and thus they proved it
 to the world that they were fighting for no private ends but facing danger for our common
 liberty. I therefore say without misgiving that their lives have been a laurel wreath for
 Athens .

They had good reason for their conduct, since you, Athenians, alone among Greeks know how to honor valiant
 men. In other cities, you will find, it is the athletes who have their statues in the
 market place, whereas in yours it is victorious generals and the slayers of the tyrants:
 men whose like it is hard to find though we search the whole of Greece for but a few, whereas the winners of contests for
 a wreath have come from many places and can easily be seen. It is then only right, since
 you pay the highest honors to your benefactors, that you should also punish with the
 utmost rigor those who dishonor and betray their country.

You should bear in mind, gentlemen, that it is not even in
 your power, unless you go beyond your rights, to acquit this man Leocrates, since his
 offence has had judgement passed upon it and a vote of condemnation too. For the council
 of the Areopagus;—(No one need interrupt me. That council was, in my opinion, the greatest
 bulwark of the city at the time;)—seized and executed men who then had fled from their
 country and abandoned it to the enemy. You must not think, gentlemen, that these
 councillors who are so scrupulous in trying other men for homicide would themselves have
 taken the life of any citizen unlawfully.

Moreover you condemned Autolycus and punished
 him because, though he himself had faced the dangers, he was charged with secretly sending
 his wife and sons away. Yet if you punished him when his only crime was that he had sent
 away persons useless for war, what should your verdict be on one who, though a man, did
 not pay his country the price of his nurture? The people also, who looked with horror upon
 what was taking place, decreed that those who were evading the danger which their
 country’s defence involved were liable for treason, meriting in their belief the extreme
 penalty.

When therefore certain actions have been censured by the most impartial council and
 condemned by you who were the judges appointed by lot, when they have been recognized by
 the people as demanding the severest punishment, will you give a verdict which opposes all
 these views? If you do, you will be the most unconscionable of men and will have few
 indeed ready to risk themselves in your defence.

It is now clear, gentlemen, that Leocrates is liable under
 all the articles of the indictment. He will, I gather, try to mislead you by saying that
 it was merely as a merchant that he departed on this voyage and that the pursuance of this
 calling took him from his home to Rhodes . So if
 he says this, please take note how you may easily expose his lies. The first point is that
 men travelling as merchants do not leave by the postern on the beach; they embark inside
 the harbor with all their friends watching to see them off. Secondly, they go alone with
 their attendant slave, not with their mistress and her maids.

Besides, what need had this Athenian to stay five years in Megara as a merchant? What need had he to send for the
 sacred images of his family or to sell his house in Athens ? The answer is that he had condemned himself as a traitor to his
 country, as a criminal who had greatly wronged us all. It would be incongruous indeed if
 you, with the decision in your power, were to dismiss this charge on which he was himself
 expecting punishment. But quite apart from these objections, we need not, I think, admit
 this line of defence.

For surely it is outrageous, when men abroad on business were hurrying to the city’s
 help, that Leocrates alone should sail away at such a time for purposes of trade, since no
 one would then have thought of adding to his wealth. Men’s only care was to preserve what
 they already had. I should like Leocrates to tell me what merchandise he could have
 brought us to render him more useful than he would have been, had he presented himself
 before the generals for enrollment and had resisted the invaders by fighting at your
 sides.

Personally I know no help to equal this. He deserves your anger for this conduct and for
 his explanation too, since he has not hesitated to tell a blatant lie. For he never
 previously carried on this trade, being in fact a master smith; and subsequently, after
 his departure, he imported nothing to us from Megara , though he was away for six years without a break. Besides, he had,
 as it happens, an interest in the two per cent tax, which he
 would never have left to live abroad on business. So if he says a word about these
 matters, I do not doubt that you will stop him.

He will perhaps in his impetuosity raise the argument,
 suggested to him by certain of his advocates, that he is not liable on a charge of
 treason, since he was not responsible for dockyards, gates or camps nor in fact for any of
 the city’s concerns. My own view is that those in charge of these positions could have
 betrayed a part of your defences only, whereas it was the whole city which Leocrates
 surrendered. Again, it is the living only whom men of their kind harm, but Leocrates has
 wronged the dead as well, depriving them of their ancestral rites.

Had the city been betrayed by them it would have been inhabited though enslaved, but left
 as this man left it, it would have been deserted. Moreover, after suffering hardships
 cities may well expect to see a change to better times, but with complete destruction even
 the hopes common to every city are taken from them. A man, if he but lives, has still a
 prospect of change from evil fortunes, but at his death there perishes with him every
 means by which prosperity could come. And so it is with cities; their misfortune reaches
 its limit when they are destroyed.

Indeed, the plain fact is that for a city destruction is like death. Let us take the
 clearest illustration. Our city was enslaved in earlier times by the tyrants and later by the Thirty, when
 the walls were demolished by the Spartans. Yet we were freed from both these evils and the
 Greeks approved us as the guardians of their welfare.

Not so with any city which has ever been destroyed. First, though it is to quote a rather
 early case, remember Troy . Who has not heard
 how, after being the greatest city of her time and ruling the whole of Asia , she was deserted for ever when once the Greeks had
 razed her? Think of Messene too, established
 again as a city five hundred years after from men of indiscriminate origin.

Perhaps one of his advocates will dare to belittle the
 offence and say that none of these misfortunes could have resulted from the action of one
 man. They are not ashamed to make before you the kind of plea for which they deserve to
 die. For if they admit that he deserted his country, once they have granted this, let them
 leave it to you to determine the seriousness of the offence; and even if he has committed
 none of these crimes, surely it is madness to say that this one man could cause no harm.

Personally, gentlemen, I think the opposite is true: the safety of the city rested with
 this man. For the city’s life continues only if each one guards her by personally doing
 his duty and if a man neglects his duty in a single aspect, he has, unwittingly, neglected
 it entirely. But it is easy, gentlemen, to ascertain the truth by referring to the
 attitude of the early lawgivers.

It was not their way, when prescribing the death penalty for the thief who stole a
 hundred talents, to approve a punishment less severe for one who took ten drachmas. Again
 with sacrilege: for a great offence they inflicted death, and for a small one too they had
 no milder punishment. They did not differentiate between him who killed a slave and him
 who killed a free man, by fining one and outlawing the other.

For all breaches of the law alike, however small, they fixed upon the death penalty,
 making no special allowances, in their assessment of the magnitude of crimes, for the
 individual circumstances of each. On one point only they insisted: was the crime such
 that, if it became more widespread, it would do serious harm to society? And it is absurd
 to face this question in any other way. Just imagine, gentlemen. Suppose someone had
 entered the Metroon and erased one law and then excused himself on the grounds
 that the city was not endangered by the loss of just this one. Would you not have killed
 him? I think you would have been justified in doing so, at least if you intended to save
 the other laws.

The same applies here: you must punish this man with death if you intend to make the
 other citizens better, oblivious of the fact that he is only one. You must consider the
 act. There are not many like him. In my opinion we have our good fortune to thank for
 that; but Leocrates, I think, deserves a more severe punishment on this account, since he
 alone of his fellow citizens sought safety for himself rather than for the city.

Nothing angers me so much, gentlemen, as to hear some
 person among his supporters saying that to have left the city is not treason, since your
 ancestors once left it when they crossed to Salamis during their war with Xerxes: a critic so senseless and
 contemptuous of you that he has presumed to confuse the most honorable action with the
 most base.

For where have men not proclaimed the valor of those heroes? Who is so grudging, who so
 completely without spirit, that he would not wish to have shared in their exploits? They
 did not desert Athens ; they simply changed the
 scene, making an honorable decision in the face of the growing menace.

Eteonicus the Spartan, Adimantus the Corinthian and the Aeginetan fleet intended, under
 cover of night, to seek safety for themselves. Our ancestors, though they were being
 deserted by all the Greeks, forcibly liberated themselves and the others too by making
 them assist at Salamis in the naval battle
 against the Persians, and so triumphed unaided over both enemy and ally, in a way
 appropriate to each, conferring a favor upon one and defeating the other in battle. A fit
 comparison indeed to make with the man who escapes from his country on a four days’ voyage
 to Rhodes !

Do you imagine that any one of those heroes would have been ready to condone such an act?
 Would they not have stoned to death one who was disgracing their valor? At least they all
 loved their country so much that they nearly stoned to death Alexander, the envoy from Xerxes, formerly their friend, because he demanded
 earth and water. If they thought it right to exact vengeance for a speech, are we to
 believe that they would not have visited with severe punishment a man who in fact
 delivered his country into the hands of the enemy?

It was because they held such beliefs as these that for ninety years they were leaders of
 the Greeks. They ravaged Phoenicia and Cilicia , triumphed
 by land and sea at the Eurymedon, captured a hundred barbarian triremes and sailed round
 the whole of Asia wasting it.

And to crown their victory: not content with erecting the trophy in Salamis , they fixed for the Persian the boundaries
 necessary for Greek freedom and prevented his overstepping them, making an agreement that
 he should not sail his warships between the Cyaneae and Phaselis and that the Greeks
 should be free not only if they lived in Europe 
 but in Asia too.

Do you think that if they had all adopted the attitude of Leocrates and fled, any of
 these glorious things would have been done or that you would still be living in this
 country? Then, gentlemen, as you praise and honor brave men so too you must hate and
 punish cowards, and particularly Leocrates who showed no fear or respect towards you.

Consider too what your traditional views have been in this
 respect and what your present feelings are. It is as well that I should remind you though
 you know already. For by Athena, in the ancient laws and in the principles of those who
 drew them up in the beginning we have indeed a panegyric on the city. You have but to
 observe them to do right and all men will respect you as worthy of her.

There is an oath which you take, sworn by all citizens when, as ephebi, they are enrolled on the register of the deme, not to disgrace your
 sacred arms, not to desert your post in the ranks, but to defend your country and to hand
 it on better than you found it. If Leocrates has sworn this oath he has clearly perjured
 himself and, quite apart from wronging you, has behaved impiously towards the god. But if
 he has not sworn it, it becomes immediately plain that he has been playing tricks in the
 hope of evading his duty; and for this you would be justified in punishing him, on your
 own and Heaven’s behalf.

I want you to hear the oath. Read, clerk. 
 The Oath.— I will not bring dishonor an my sacred arms nor will I abandon my comrade wherever I shall be stationed. I will defend the rights of gods and men and will not leave my country smaller, when I die, but greater and better, so far as I am able by myself and with the help of all. I will respect the rulers of the time duly and the existing ordinances duly and all others which may be established in the future. And if anyone seeks to destroy the ordinances I will oppose him so far as I am able by myself and with the help of all. I will honor the cults of my fathers. Witnesses to this shall be the gods Agraulus, Hestia, Enyo, Enyalius, Ares, Athena the Warrior, Zeus, Thallo, Auxo, Hegemone, Heracles, and the boundaries of my native land, wheat, barley, vines, olive-trees, fig-trees. . . . 
 It is a fine and solemn oath, gentlemen; an oath which Leocrates has broken in all that he has done. How could a man be more impious or a greater traitor to his country? How could he disgrace his arms more than by refusing to take them up and resist the enemy? Is there any doubt that a man has deserted the soldier at his side and left his post, if he did not even offer his person for enlistment?

How could anyone have defended the rights of men and gods who did not face a single
 danger? What greater treachery could he have shown towards his country, which, for all
 that he has done to save it, is left at the mercy of the enemy? Then will you not kill
 this man who is answerable for every crime? If not, whom will you punish? Those guilty of
 only one such act? It will be easy then to commit serious offences among you, if you show
 that the smaller ones arouse your anger more.

There is a further point which you should notice,
 gentlemen. The power which keeps our democracy together is the oath. For there are three
 things of which the state is built up: the archon, the juryman and the private citizen.
 Each of these gives this oath as a pledge, and rightly so. For human beings have often
 been deceived. Many criminals evade them, escaping the dangers of the moment, yes, and
 even remaining unpunished for these crimes for the remainder of their lives. But the gods
 no one who broke his oath would deceive. No one would escape their vengeance. If the
 perjured man does not suffer himself, at least his children and all his family are
 overtaken by dire misfortunes.

It was for this reason, gentlemen of the jury, that all the Greeks exchanged this pledge
 at Plataea , before taking up their posts to
 fight against the power of Xerxes. The formula was not their own but borrowed from the
 oath which is traditional among you. It would be well for you to hear it; for though the
 events of that time are ancient history now we can discern clearly enough, in these
 recorded words, the courage of our forbears. Please read the oath.

The Oath.— I will not hold life dearer than freedom nor will I abandon my leaders whether they are alive or dead. I will bury all allies killed in the battle. If I conquer the barbarians in war I will not destroy any of the cities which have fought for Greece but I will consecrate a tenth of all those which sided with the barbarian. I will not rebuild a single one of the shrines which the barbarians have burnt and razed but will allow them to remain for future generations as a memorial of the barbarians’ impiety.

They stood by this oath so firmly, gentlemen, that they
 had the favor of the gods on their side to help them; and, though all the Greeks proved
 courageous in the hour of danger, your city won the most renown. Your ancestors faced
 death to save the city from shame; nothing could then be worse than for you to pardon
 those who have disgraced her and allowed our national glory, won through many hardships,
 to perish by the wickedness of men like this.

Consider, gentlemen: you are the only Greeks for whom it
 is impossible to ignore any of these crimes. Let me remind you of a few past episodes; and
 if you take them as examples you will reach a better verdict in the present case and in
 others also. The greatest virtue of your city is that she has set the Greeks an example of
 noble conduct. In age she surpasses every
 city, and in valor too our ancestors have no less surpassed their fellows.

Remember the reign of Codrus. The
 Peloponnesians, whose crops had failed at home, decided to march against our city and,
 expelling our ancestors, to divide the land amongst themselves. They sent first to
 Delphi and asked the god if they were going
 to capture Athens , and when he replied that
 they would take the city so long as they did not kill Codrus, the king of the Athenians,
 they marched out against Athens .

But a Delphian Cleomantis, learning of the oracle, secretly told the Athenians. Such, it
 seems, was the goodwill which our ancestors always inspired even among aliens. And when
 the Pelopannesians invaded Attica , what did our
 ancestors do, gentlemen of the jury? They did not desert their country and retire as
 Leocrates did, nor surrender to the enemy the land that reared them and its temples. No.
 Though they were few in number, shut inside the walls, they endured the hardships of a
 siege to preserve their country.

And such was the nobility, gentlemen, of those kings of old that they preferred to die
 for the safety of their subjects rather than to purchase life by the adoption of another
 country. That at least is true of Codrus, who, they say, told the Athenians to note the
 time of his death and, taking a beggar’s clothes to deceive the enemy, slipped out by the
 gates and began to collect firewood in front of the town. When two men from the camp
 approached him and inquired about conditions in the city he killed one of them with a blow
 of his sickle.

The survivor, it is said, enraged with Codrus and thinking him a beggar drew his sword
 and killed him. Then the Athenians sent a herald and asked to have their king given over
 for burial, telling the enemy the whole truth and the Peloponnesians restored the body but
 retreated, aware that it was no longer open to them to secure the country. To Cleomantis
 of Delphi the city made a grant of maintenance
 in the Prytaneum for himself and his descendants for ever.

Is there any resemblance between Leocrates’ love for his country and the love of those
 ancient kings who preferred to die for her and outwit the foe, giving their own life in
 exchange for the people’s safety? It is for this reason that they and only they have given
 the land their name and received honors like the gods, as is their due. For they were
 entitled, even after death, to a share in the country which they so zealously preserved.

But Leocrates, whether alive or dead, would have no claim to a portion in it; he of all
 men deserves to be cast out from the country which he abandoned to the enemy by his
 flight. For it is unfitting that the same ground should cover heroes and the most cowardly
 of mankind.

Yet he contended (and perhaps he will say this to you now
 also) that he would not have faced this trial if he had been conscious of committing a
 crime like this. As if all thieves and temple-robbers did not use this argument! It is an
 argument which goes to prove their shamelessness rather than the fact of their innocence.
 That is not the point at issue; we need the assurance that he did not sail, that he did
 not leave the city or settle at Megara .

These are the facts by which the truth can be established. As for his appearance in
 court: surely some god brought him specially for punishment, so that, after shirking an
 honorable danger, he might meet a death of disgrace and shame and place himself at the
 mercy of the men he betrayed. If misfortune befalls him in some other place it is hardly
 clear if this is the crime for which he is being punished. But here, among the men whom he
 betrayed, it is obvious that his own transgressions of the law have brought upon him this
 reward.

For the first step taken by the gods in the case of wicked men is to unhinge their
 reason; and personally I value as the utterance of an oracle these lines, composed by
 ancient poets and handed down to posterity : 
 When gods in anger seek a mortal’s harm, First they
 deprive him of his sanity, And fashion of his mind a baser
 instrument, That he may have no knowledge when he errs. 
 unknown

Who does not know the fate of Callistratus, which the older among you remember and the younger have heard
 recounted, the man condemned to death by the city? How he fled and later, hearing from the
 god at Delphi that if he returned to
 Athens he would have fair treatment by the
 laws, came back and taking refuge at the altar of the twelve gods was none the less put to
 death by the state, and rightly so, for fair treatment by the laws is, in the case of
 wrongdoers, punishment. And thus the god too acted rightly in allowing those who had been
 wronged to punish the offender. For it would be an unseemly thing if revelations made to
 good men were the same as those vouchsafed to malefactors.

It is my belief, gentlemen, that the guidance of the gods
 presides over all human affairs and more especially, as is to be expected, over our duty
 towards our parents, towards the dead and towards the gods themselves. For in our dealings
 with those to whom we owe our being, at whose hands we have enjoyed the greatest benefits,
 it is the utmost sacrilege that we should fail, not merely to do our duty, but even to
 dedicate our lives to their service.

Let me take an illustration. There is a story that in Sicily ,—the tale, though half a legend, will, for the younger ones among
 you, be well worth the hearing,—a stream of fire burst forth from Etna . This stream, so the story goes, flowing over the
 countryside, drew near a certain city of the Sicilians. Most men, thinking of their own
 safety, took to flight; but one of the youths, seeing that his father, now advanced in
 years, could not escape and was being overtaken by the fire, lifted him up and carried
 him.

Hindered no doubt by the additional weight of his burden, he too was overtaken. And now
 let us observe the mercy shown by God towards good men. For we are told that the fire
 spread round that spot in a ring and only those two men were saved, so that the place is
 still called the Place of the Pious, while those who had fled in haste, leaving their
 parents to their fate, were all consumed.

You too, therefore, following that divine example, should punish with one accord this man
 who spared no pains to show himself in all respects the greatest criminal, depriving the
 gods of their traditional cults, abandoning his parents to the enemy and denying the dead
 their dues.

Here is another story, gentlemen. Again I shall be
 speaking of our ancestors, since it is only right that you should hear of the deeds in
 which they took a pride and give them your approval. The tradition is that Eumolpus, the
 son of Poseidon and Chione, came with the Thracians to claim this country during the reign
 of Erechtheus who was married to Praxithea, the daughter of Cephisus.

As a large army was about to invade their country, he went to Delphi and asked the god by what means he could assure
 a victory over the enemy. The god’s answer to him was that if he sacrificed his daughter
 before the two sides engaged he would defeat the enemy and, submitting to the god, he did
 this and drove the invaders from the country.

We have therefore good reason to thank Euripides, because, apart from his other merits as
 a poet, he chose this subject for a play, believing that in the conduct of
 those people the citizens would have a fine example which they could keep before them and
 so implant in their hearts a love of their country. You must hear the iambic lines,
 gentlemen of the jury, which, in the play, are spoken by the mother of the girl. You will
 find in them a greatness of spirit and a nobility worthy of Athens and a daughter of Cephisus. 
 Speech from Euripides He wins men’s hearts who with a ready hand 
 Confers his favors; he who in the doing 
 Delays and falters is less generous. 
 But I consent to give my child to die 
 For many reasons: first there is no state 
 I count more worthy to accept my gift 
 Than Athens , peopled by no alien race. 
 For we are of this soil, while other towns, 
 Formed as by hazard in a game of draughts, 
 Take their inhabitants from diverse parts. 
 He who adopts a city, having left 
 Some other town, resembles a bad peg 
 Fixed into wood of better quality, 
 A citizen in name but not in fact. 
 And secondly: it is that we may guard 
 Our country and the altars of the gods 
 That we get children for ourselves at all. 
 This city, though it bears a single name, 
 Holds many people in it. Should I then 
 Destroy all these, when it is in my power 
 To give one girl to die on their behalf? 
 The mere ability to count, and tell 
 The greater from the less, convinces me 
 That this, the ruin of one person’s home, 
 Is of less consequence and brings less grief 
 Than would result if the whole city fell. 
 If I had sons at home instead of girls, 
 When hostile flames beset the city’s walls, 
 Should I not send them forth into the fight, 
 Though fearing for them? May my children then 
 Fight also, vie with men, and not become 
 Mere shapes of vanity within the state. 
 And yet, when mothers send their sons to war 
 With tears, they often daunt them as they leave. 
 I hate the women who above all else 
 Prefer their sons to live and put this thought 
 Before their honor, urging cowardice. 
 But if they fall in battle they obtain 
 A common grave and glory which they share 
 With many others; whereas she, my child, 
 By dying for this city will attain 
 A garland destined solely for herself. 
 And she will save her mother and you too 
 And both her sisters. Is it right to scorn 
 Honors like these? Except in nature’s way 
 This girl whom I shall give for sacrifice 
 To save her native land is not my own. 
 And if the city falls, what further chance 
 Shall I have left me to enjoy my child? 
 So far as rests with me, all shall be saved. 
 Let others rule in Athens ; I will be 
 Her savior, and without my wish no man 
 Shall harm what most concerns our common good, 
 The ancient laws our fathers handed down. 
 Eumolpus and his slavish Thracian train 
 Shall set no trident in our midst or deck 
 It round with garlands, where the olive tree 
 And Gorgon’s golden head have been revered; 
 Nor shall Athena meet with utter scorn. 
 Come, citizens, and use my travail’s fruit 
 To save yourselves and conquer, knowing well 
 That I could never hesitate to save 
 This city for the sake of one poor life. 
 My country, were the love of all your sons 
 As great as mine! You could not suffer ill, 
 And we possessing you would live secure. 
 Euripides

On these verses, gentlemen, your fathers were brought up.
 All women are by nature fond of children, but this one Euripides portrayed as loving her
 country more than her offspring and made it clear that, if women bring themselves to act
 like this, men should show towards their country a devotion which cannot be surpassed, not
 forsake it and flee, as Leocrates did, nor disgrace it before the whole of Greece .

I want also to recommend Homer to you. In your fathers’
 eyes he was a poet of such worth that they passed a law that every four years at the
 Panathenaea he alone of all the poets should have his works recited ; and thus they showed the Greeks their admiration for the noblest
 deeds. They were right to do so. Laws are too brief to give instruction: they merely state
 the things that must be done; but poets, depicting life itself, select the noblest actions
 and so through argument and demonstration convert men’s hearts.

Thus Hector, while exhorting the Trojans to defend their country, speaks these words: 
 
 Fight on unresting by the ships; and if some meet their fate 
 By wound of dart, or battling hand to hand, then let them die. 
 To fall in combat for your country’s sake is no disgrace; 
 For wife and child will live unharmed, and home and plot last on, 
 If once the Achaeans leave and sail their ships to their own land. Hom. Il. 15.494

These are the lines, gentlemen, to which your forefathers
 listened, and such are the deeds which they emulated. Thus they developed such courage
 that they were ready to die, not for their country alone, but for the whole of Greece as a land in whose heritage they shared. Certainly
 those who confronted the barbarians at Marathon, by defeating an army from the whole of
 Asia , won, at their own peril, security for
 every Greek alike. They gave themselves no credit for glory but valued rather conduct
 deserving of it, whereby they made themselves the champions of the Greeks and lords of the
 barbarians. Their pursuit of valor was no idle boast; they displayed it in action to the
 world.

Mark how the men who lived at Athens then
 excelled in public, and in private life; so greatly that when in days gone by the
 Spartans, so renowned for courage, were at war with the Messenians the god advised them to
 take a leader from us; for so they would defeat their enemies. And yet if the god decided
 that the leaders sent from Athens were better
 than the two descendants of Heracles who in succession reign at Sparta , must we not conclude that nothing could surpass
 the valor of our ancestors?

Does any Greek not know that they took Tyrtaeus from our city to be their leader and with him
 defeated their enemies and established their system of training for the young, thus wisely
 providing for the immediate danger and for their whole future too? For Tyrtaeus left them
 elegiac poems by his own hand, and through listening to these they are trained to be
 brave.

Though they have no regard for other poets, they valued his works so highly that they
 passed a law which provides that their men, after taking the field, shall be summoned to
 the king’s tent to hear the verses of Tyrtaeus all together, holding that this of all
 things would make them most ready to die for their country. It will be profitable for you
 to hear these elegiac verses too, that you may know what sort of conduct brought men fame
 among the Spartans. 
 Nobly comes death to him who in the van 
 Fighting for fatherland has made his stand. 
 Shame and despite attend the coward’s flight, 
 Who, leaving native town and fruitful land, 
 Wanders, a homeless beggar, with his kin, 
 True wife, old father, mother, tender child. 
 Unwelcome will he be where’er he goes, 
 Bowed dawn with hardship and by want defiled. 
 Bringing his house dishonor, he belies 
 His noble mien, a prey to fear and shame. 
 Thus roams the waif unpitied and unloved, 
 He and the line that after bears his name. 
 Be stalwart then. Think not of life or limb; 
 Shielding our land and children let us die. 
 Youths, brave the fight together. Be not first 
 To yield to craven cowardice and fly. 
 Make large your hearts within you. Undismayed 
 Engage in battle with grown men. Be bold; 
 And standing fast forsake not those whose feet 
 No longer keep their swiftness. Guard the old. 
 For shame it is to see an elder fall, 
 Down in the forefront, smitten in the strife, 
 Before the youths, with grey beard, hair grown white, 
 To breathe out in the dust his valiant life, 
 Clasping his bloody groin with clinging hands, 
 (Fit sight indeed to kindle wrath and shame!) 
 His body bared. But those whom youth’s sweet flower 
 Adorns unfaded nothing can defame. 
 Honor of men is theirs, in life, and women’s love; 
 Fair are they too when in the van laid low. 
 Then clench your teeth and, with both feet astride, 
 Firm planted on the ground withstand the foe. 
 Tyrtaeus

They are fine lines, gentlemen, and a lesson too for those
 who wish to heed them. Such was the courage of the men who used to hear them that they
 disputed with our city for supremacy; no matter for surprise, since the most gallant feats
 had been performed by either people. Your ancestors defeated the barbarians who first set
 foot in Attica , demonstrating clearly the
 superiority of valor over wealth and courage over numbers. The Spartans took the field at
 Thermopylae , and, though their fortune
 was less happy, in bravery they far surpassed all rivals.

And so over their graves a testimony to their courage can be seen, faithfully engraved
 for every Greek to read: to the Spartans: 
 Go tell the Spartans, thou who passest by, That
 here obedient to their laws we lie. 
 Simonides 
 And to your ancestors: 
 Athenians, guarding Greece , subdued in fight At Marathon the gilded Persians’
 might. 
 
 i. 42): 
 Dic, hospes, Spartae nos te hic vidisse
 iacentes dum sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur. 
 Simonides

These are noble lines for us to remember, Athenians; they
 are a tribute to those whose deeds they record and an undying glory to the city. But
 Leocrates has not acted thus. Deliberately he sullied that honor which the city has
 accumulated from the earliest times. Therefore if you kill him all Greeks will believe
 that you too hate such acts as his. If not, you will rob your forbears of their long-lived
 renown, and will do grievous harm to your fellow citizens. For those who do not admire our
 ancestors will try to imitate Leocrates believing, that although among men of the past the
 old virtues had a place of honor, in your eyes shamelessness, treachery and cowardice are
 held in most esteem.

If I am unable to show you what your attitude towards such
 men should be, remember your ancestors and the methods of punishment which they employed
 against them. Capable as they were of the noblest actions, they were no less ready to
 punish what was base. Think of them, gentlemen; think how enraged they were with traitors
 and how they looked on them as common enemies of the city.

You remember when Phrynichus was murdered at night beside the fountain in the osier
 beds by Apollodorus and Thrasybulus, who were later caught and put in the prison by the
 friends of Phrynichus. The people noted what had happened and, releasing the prisoners,
 held an inquiry after torture. On investigation they found that Phrynichus had been trying
 to betray the city and that his murderers had been unjustly imprisoned.

They decreed publicly, on the motion of Critias, that the dead man should be tried for
 treason, and that if it were found that this was a tratior who had been buried in the
 country, his bones should be dug up and removed from Attica , 
 so that the land should not have lying in it even the bones of one who had betrayed his
 country and his city.

They decreed also that if any persons defended the dead man and he were found guilty,
 they should be liable to the same punishment as he. Thus, in their view, it was wrong even
 to assist men who had deserted others; and to try to save the traitor would be to betray
 the city no less than he. In this way then, by hating wrongdoers and by passing such
 measures against them, they brought themselves safely out of dangers. Produce the decree
 for them, clerk, and read it.

Decree 
 You hear this decree, gentlemen. After it was passed your
 ancestors dug up the traitor’s bones and cast them out of Attica ; they killed his defenders, Aristarchus and Alexicles, and even
 refused them burial in the country. Will you then, who have the very person who has
 betrayed the city alive and at the mercy of your vote, let him go unpunished?

Your ancestors inflicted the extreme penalty on men who simply lent the traitor verbal
 help. Will you fall so short of their example as to let go as innocent the man who
 abandoned the state in deed as well as word? Do not do it, gentlemen of the jury. Do not
 give a verdict unworthy of yourselves; for it would be both impious and contrary to your
 traditions. If only one such decree were recorded, we might have said that anger rather
 than real conviction had prompted it. But when the same punishment was meted out by them
 to all alike it is surely plain that our ancestors were by nature bound to make war an all
 such crimes.

When Hipparchus, the son of Charmus, did not stand
 his trial for treason before the people but let the case go by default, they sentenced him
 to death. Then, as they did not secure his person to answer for the crime, they took down
 his statue from the Acropolis and, melting it down, made a pillar of it, on which they
 decreed that the names of sinners and traitors should be inscribed. Hipparchus himself has
 his name recorded on this pillar and all other traitors too.

Clerk, please take the decree which authorized the statue of Hipparchus to be taken down
 from the Acropolis and then the inscription at the base of the pillar with the names of
 the traitors later engraved upon it and read them out.

Decree and Text of Inscription on the Pillar 
 What is your impression of them, gentlemen? Had they the
 same attitude as yourselves towards wrongdoers? Or did they, by obliterating the memorial
 of the traitor, since they could not command his person, punish him with all the means at
 their disposal? The simple fact of melting down the bronze statue was not enough for them;
 they wished to leave to their successors a lasting memorial of their attitude to traitors.

Let the jury hear the other decree, clerk, relating to the
 men who withdrew to Decelea when the people were besieged by the Spartans,
 so that they will realize that the punishments inflicted by our ancestors on traitors were
 uniform and self-consistent. Read it.

Decree 
 You hear this decree too, gentlemen. It says that they
 condemned any who moved to Decelea in war-time and laid it down that those who were caught
 returning should be led by any Athenian who cared to do so to the Thesmothetae who should
 take them into custody and hand them over to the executioner. If they dealt thus with men who merely changed their place in
 Attica , how will you treat Leocrates who in
 wartime fled from his city and his country to Rhodes and deserted the state? Will you not kill him? If you do not, how
 can you pass as the descendants of those men?

You ought also to hear the decree relating to the man
 executed in Salamis . Though he
 had only attempted to speak treason against the city, the Council, after removing their
 crowns, killed him with their own hands. It is an admirable decree, gentlemen, and well
 worthy of your ancestors. Their nobility, revealed in their characters, was shown too in
 their punishment of criminals.

Decree 
 What is your view, gentlemen? Do you think that if you
 wish to emulate your forefathers, it is in keeping to allow Leacrates to live? When they
 dispatched like that one who merely betrayed with his lips a city already desolate, how
 ought you, whose city prospered at the time, to treat the man who did in very fact desert
 it? Ought you not to outdo them in severity? When they chastised so sternly those who
 tried to rob them of the security which the people offered, how ought you to treat a traitor to the people’s own safety?
 And if they, from considerations of honor only, took vengeance on criminals in this way,
 how should you react when your country is at stake?

These instances suffice to show you the attitude of our
 ancestors towards those who broke the city’s laws. Nevertheless I want also to remind you
 of the pillar in the Council Chamber which commemorates traitors and enemies of democracy.
 For if my point is backed by frequent illustrations, I am rendering your verdict easy.
 After the rule of the Thirty, your fathers, who had suffered from citizens what no other
 Greek had ever thought fit to inflict and had barely managed to return to their country,
 barred all the paths to crime, having learnt by experience the principles and methods
 followed by men who wished to overthrow democracy.

For they established it by decree and oath that anyone who found a person aspiring to
 tyranny or attempting to betray the city or overthrow the democracy should be guiltless if
 he killed him. They thought it better that imagined
 culprits should perish than that they themselves should have a real experience of slavery,
 holding that citizens must simply live in such a manner as to avoid the very suspicion of
 any of these crimes. Please take the decree.

Decree 
 These words, gentlemen, they inscribed on the pillar,
 erecting it in the Council Chamber as a reminder to those who daily met in council over
 affairs of state what their attitude to men like this should be, and hence they swore a
 common oath to kill them if they saw them even contemplating such conduct. Naturally
 enough. For where other offences are concerned, the punishment should follow on the crime;
 but in cases of treason or the overthrow of a democracy it should precede it. If you let
 slip the moment when the criminals are contemplating some treasonable act against their
 country, you cannot afterwards bring them to justice for their crimes, since by then they
 are too powerful to be punished by those whom they have wronged.

Let this foresight, gentlemen, and these actions be the
 inspiration to you that they should. Remember, when you vote, the temper of your forbears,
 and urge each other to bring in today, before you leave the court, a verdict modelled to
 their pattern. You have memorials, you have examples of the punishments they meted out,
 embodied in the decrees concerning criminals. You have sworn in the decree of Demophantus
 to kill the man who betrays his country, whether by word or deed, hand or vote. I say
 you ; for you must not think that, as heirs to the riches bequeathed by your ancestors,
 you can yet renounce your share in their oaths or in the pledge your fathers gave as a
 security to the gods, thereby enjoying the prosperity of their city.

Your city was not alone in dealing thus with traitors. The
 Spartans were the same. Please do not think me tedious, gentlemen, if I allude often to
 these men. We shall be well advised to take examples of just conduct from a city which has
 good laws, and so be surer that each of you will give a just verdict in keeping with his
 oath. The Spartans, you remember, caught their king Pausanias trying to betray Greece to the Persians. He escaped in time into the temple
 of the Brazen House, but they walled up the door, took off the roof and mounted guard in a
 circle round it, remaining at their posts until they had starved him to death

and made his punishment a proof to all that even divine assistance is not vouchsafed to
 traitors. And it is right that it should not be; for impiety
 towards the gods is the first crime by which they show their wickedness, since they
 deprive them of their traditional cults. But I have yet to give you the best illustration
 of the prevailing practice at Sparta . They
 passed a law, covering all who refused to risk their lives for their country, which
 expressly stated that they should be put to death. Thus the punishment which they laid
 down was the very fate which traitors most fear; survival after war was to be subject to a
 scrutiny which might involve disgrace and death. Let me convince you that what I have said
 can be proved and that my examples are genuine. Produce the law for them.

The Law of the Spartans 
 See what an admirable law this is, gentlemen, and how
 expedient it would be for other peoples too besides the Spartans. The fear of one’s own
 community is a strong thing and will compel men to face danger against an enemy; no one
 will forsake his country in times of peril when he sees that a traitor is punished with
 death. No one will turn coward when his city needs him, if he knows that the punishment in
 store for him is this. For death is the one fitting penalty for cowardice; since, when men
 know that there are two alternative dangers of which they must face one, they will choose
 to meet the enemy far rather than stand out against the law and their fellow citizens.

Leocrates is much more deserving of death than deserters
 from the army. They return to the city ready to defend it or to meet disaster in company
 with their fellow citizens, while he fled from his country and provided for his own
 safety, not daring to protect his hearth and home. He alone of men has betrayed even the
 natural ties of kinship and blood which the unthinking beasts themselves hold dearest and
 most sacred.

Birds at least, which by nature are best fitted for a swift escape, can be seen accepting
 death in defence of their brood. Hence the words of the old poets: 
 Nor does the wild fowl let another’s brood Be laid
 within the nest that she has built. 
 unknown 
 But the cowardice of Leocrates has so passed all bounds that he left his country to
 the enemy.

That is why no city let him reside within it as an alien. He was naturally expelled more
 quickly than a murderer. Exiles for murder who move into another city do not meet with
 enmity among their hosts; but what city could admit Leocrates? One who refused to help his
 own country would indeed be likely to face danger for another’s! Such men are bad, whether
 as citizens, guests, or personal friends; for they will enjoy the advantages offered by
 the state but will not consent to assist it too, in times of difficulty.

Consider: he is hated and expelled by those without a reason to resent him; what
 treatment should he get from you who have had the utmost provocation? Should it not be the
 extreme penalty? Indeed, gentlemen, if there were any punishment worse than death,
 Leocrates of all the traitors that have ever been would most deserve to undergo it. For
 other traitors are punished, though, when they are caught, their crime has yet to be
 committed. The defendant, alone of all men, by deserting the city, has, at the time of his
 trial, accomplished what he undertook to do.

I am amazed at the advocates who are going to defend him.
 Whatever justification, I wonder, will they find for his acquittal? Will it be his
 friendship with themselves? In my own view they are not entitled to indulgence but deserve
 to die for daring to be intimate with him. Though their attitude was not obvious, before
 Leocrates acted as he did, it is clear to everyone now, since they maintain their
 friendship with him, that they uphold the same principles as he does and should therefore
 far rather be required to plead their own defence than be allowed to win your pardon for
 him.

I believe myself that if the dead really do have any
 knowledge of earthly affairs, his own father, now no more, would be a sterner judge than
 any other; since he it was whose bronze statue Leocrates left behind him in the temple of
 Zeus the Savior, abandoned to the enemy for them to steal or mutilate. He turned that
 statue, which his father erected as a memorial of his own uprightness, into an object of
 reproach, since it commemorates a man now famed as father of a son like this.

It is with this in mind, gentlemen, that many have approached me and asked why I did not
 include in the indictment the charge that he had betrayed his father’s statue, dedicated
 in the temple of Zeus the Savior. Gentlemen, I fully realized that this offence called for
 the most severe punishment, but I did not think it right, when prosecuting the defendant
 for treason, to add the name of Zeus the Savior to the bill of indictment.

What astounds me most of all is, that though you are
 dealing with men who have no ties of blood or friendship with him but who always champion
 defendants for a fee, you do not realize that they deserve to feel your anger in its
 fullest violence. If they and their kind defend the criminals it is proof that they would
 associate themselves with the actual crimes. It is to defend you, in the interests of
 democracy and law, not to oppose you, that a speaker should have acquired his skill.

Some of them indeed are no longer using arguments to try
 to deceive you; they will even cite their own public services in favor of the defendants.
 These I particularly resent. For having performed the services for the advancement of
 their own families, they are now asking you for public token of thanks.
 Horsebreeding, a
 handsome payment for a chorus, and other expensive gestures, do not entitle a man to any
 such recognition from you, since for these acts he alone is crowned, conferring no benefit
 on others. To earn your gratitude he must, instead, have been distinguished as a
 trierarch, or built walls to protect his city, or subscribed generously from his own
 property for the public safety. These are services to the state:

they affect the welfare of you all and prove the loyalty of the donors, while the others
 are evidence of nothing but the wealth of those who have spent the money. I do not believe
 that anyone has done the city so great a service that he can claim the acquittal of
 traitors as a special privilege for himself; nor do I believe that anyone, with ambitions
 for the city’s honor, is so unthinking as to help Leocrates, by whom he, first and
 foremost, had those ambitions frustrated; unless indeed such people have interests other
 than their country’s.

Though it may not be customary at any other time for
 members of the jury to set their wives and children beside them in the court, at least in
 a trial for treason this practice ought to have been sanctioned, so as to bring into full
 view all those who shared in the danger, as a reminder that they had not been thought
 deserving of the pity which is their universal right, and make the jury reach a sterner
 verdict on the man who wronged them. Since, however, custom and tradition have not
 sanctioned this and you must act on their behalf, at least avenge yourselves upon
 Leocrates by putting him to death, and so report to your own wives and children that when
 you had their betrayer in your power you took vengeance upon him.

It is an outrageous scandal for Leocrates to think that he, the runaway, should take his
 place in the city of those who stood their ground, the deserter among men who fought in
 battle, the one who left his post among those who saved their country; it is outrageous
 that he is returnIng to have access to your cults and sacrifices, to your market, your
 laws and constitution, when to save these from destruction a thousand of your citizens
 fell at Chaeronea and received public burial from
 the city. Yet Leocrates, on his way back to Athens , even braved the epitaphs engraved on their memorials, shamelessly
 presuming to exhibit himself, in the way he does, before the eyes of those who mourn their
 loss.

He will shortly beg you to hear him plead his defence according to the laws. Ask him what
 laws. The ones he deserted in his flight. He will beg you to let him live within the walls
 of his native city. Which walls? Those which he, alone of Athenians, did not help to
 defend. He will call on the gods to save him from danger. Who are they? Are they not the
 gods whose temples, altars and precincts he betrayed? He will beg and pray you to pity
 him. To whom is this prayer addressed if not to men who made a contribution to safety
 which he had not the courage to make? Let him make his plea to the Rhodians, since he
 thought their city safer than his own country.

Would any men, no matter what their age, be justified in pitying him? Take the older
 generation. He did his best to deny them so much as a safe old age or even a grave in the
 free soil of their native land. What of the younger men? Would any of them, remembering
 their contemporaries, comrades in arms at Chaeronea who shared the same dangers, absolve the man who has betrayed the
 graves they lie in? Would they, in the same vote, denounce as mad those who died for
 freedom and let Leocrates who deserted his country go unpunished as a sane man?

By such means you will grant to all who wish it the power to injure the state and
 yourselves whether by word or deed. This is no simple matter of an exile’s coming back;
 the deserter of his city, who condemned himself to banishment and lived for more than five
 or six years in Megara with a sponsor, is now
 at large in Attica and in the city. It means that
 one who openly gave his vote for abandoning Attica to be a sheep-walk is in this country resident among you.

Before I leave the platform I want to add a few remarks
 and to read you the decree relating to piety which the people drew up. It has a message
 for you who are on the point of giving your verdict. Please read it. 
 Decree 
 My part consists in
 exposing one who is doing away with all these principles, to you who are empowered to
 chastise him it remains for you, as a service to yourselves and Heaven, to take vengeance
 on Leocrates. For while crimes remain untried the guilt rests with those who committed
 them, but once the trial has taken place it falls on all who did not mete out justice. Do
 not forget, gentlemen, that each of you now, though giving his vote in secret, will openly
 proclaim his attitude to the gods.

I believe, gentlemen, that all the greatest and most atrocious crimes are today included
 within the scope of your single verdict; for Leocrates can be shown to have committed them
 all. He is guilty of treason, since he left the city and surrendered it to the enemy;
 guilty of overthrowing the democracy, because he did not face the danger which is the
 price of freedom; guilty of impiety, because he has done all in his power to have the
 sacred precincts ravaged and the temples destroyed. He is guilty too of injuring his
 forbears, for he effaced their memorials and deprived them of their rites, and guilty of
 desertion and refusal to serve, since he did not submit his person to the leaders for
 enrollment.

Shall this man then find someone to acquit him or pardon his deliberate misdeeds? Who is
 so senseless as to choose to save Leocrates at the cost of leaving his own security at the
 mercy of men who wish to be deserters, to choose to pity him at the cost of being killed
 himself without pity by his enemies, or to grant a favor to the betrayer of his country
 and so expose himself to the vengeance of the gods?

My task has been to assist my country, its temples and its
 laws. I have conducted the trial rightly and justly without slandering the private life of
 the defendant or digressing from the subject of my indictment. It is now for each of you
 to reflect that the absolver of Leocrates condemns his country to death and slavery, that
 of the two caskets before you one stands for treason and the other for deliverance, that
 the votes cast into one are given for the destruction of your country and the rest for
 safety and prosperity in Athens .

If you acquit Leocrates, you will vote for the betrayal of the city, of its temples and
 its fleet. But if you kill him, you will be encouraging others to preserve your country
 with its revenues and its prosperity. Imagine then, Athenians, that the country and its
 trees are appealing to you, that the harbors, dockyards and walls of the city are begging
 you for protection, yes, and the temples and sanctuaries too. Bear in mind the charges
 brought and make of Leocrates a proof that with you tears and compassion have not more
 weight than the salvation of the laws and people.