Since many have undertaken to set in order a narrative
concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us,

even as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the
word delivered them to us,

it seemed good to me also, having
traced the course of all things accurately from the first, to write to
you in order, most excellent Theophilus;

that you might know the
certainty concerning the things in which you were instructed.

There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain
priest named Zacharias, of the priestly division of Abijah. He had a
wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.

They
were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord.

But they had no child,
because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well advanced in
years.

Now it happened, while he executed the priest's office
before God in the order of his division,

according to the custom
of the priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the
Lord and burn incense.

The whole multitude of the people were
praying outside at the hour of incense.

An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right
side of the altar of incense.

Zacharias was troubled when he saw
him, and fear fell upon him.

But the angel said to him, "Don't
be afraid, Zacharias, because your request has been heard, and your
wife, Elizabeth, will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John.

You will have joy and gladness; and many will rejoice at his
birth.

For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he
will drink no wine nor strong drink. He will be filled with the Holy
Spirit, even from his mother's womb.

He will turn many of the
children of Israel to the Lord, their God.

He will go before him
in the spirit and power of Elijah, 'to turn the hearts of the fathers
to the children,' and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to
make ready a people prepared for the Lord."

Zacharias said to the angel, "How can I be sure of this? For
I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years."

The angel answered him, "I am Gabriel, who stands in the
presence of God. I was sent to speak to you, and to bring you this good
news.

Behold, you will be silent and not able to speak, until
the day that these things will happen, because you didn't believe my
words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time."

The people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marveled that
he delayed in the temple.

When he came out, he could not speak
to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. He
continued making signs to them, and remained mute.

It happened,
when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house.

After these days Elizabeth, his wife, conceived, and she hid
herself five months, saying,

"Thus has the Lord done to me in
the days in which he looked at me, to take away my reproach among men."

Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God
to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,

to a virgin pledged to be
married to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. The
virgin's name was Mary.

Having come in, the angel said to her,
"Rejoice, you highly favored one! The Lord is with you. Blessed are you
among women!"

But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the saying,
and considered what kind of salutation this might be.

The angel
said to her, "Don't be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.

Behold, you will conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son,
and will call his name 'Jesus.'

He will be great, and will be
called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne
of his father, David,

and he will reign over the house of Jacob
forever. There will be no end to his kingdom."

Mary said to the angel, "How can this be, seeing I am a
virgin?"

The angel answered her, "The Holy Spirit will come on you,
and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore also the
holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God.

Behold, Elizabeth, your relative, also has conceived a son in her old
age; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.

For everything spoken by God is possible.

Mary said, "Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it to me
according to your word."

 The angel departed from her.

Mary arose in those days and
went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah,

and
entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.

It
happened, when Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, that the baby leaped in
her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.

She
called out with a loud voice, and said, "Blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb!

Why am I so favored, that
the mother of my Lord should come to me?

For behold, when the
voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby leaped in my womb
for joy!

Blessed is she who believed, for there will be a
fulfillment of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord!"

Mary said,
"My soul magnifies the Lord.

My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,

For he has looked at the humble state of his handmaid.
For behold, from now on, all generations will call me blessed.

For he who is mighty has done great things for me.
 Holy is his name.

His mercy is for generations of generations on those who fear
 him.

He has shown strength with his arm.
 He has scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.

He has put down princes from their thrones.
 And has exalted the lowly.

He has filled the hungry with good things.
 He has sent the rich away empty.

He has given help to Israel, his servant, that he might remember
 mercy,

As he spoke to our fathers,
 To Abraham and his seed forever."

Mary stayed with her about three months, and then returned to
her house.

Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was
fulfilled, and she brought forth a son.

Her neighbors and her
relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and
they rejoiced with her.

It happened on the eighth day, that they
came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him Zacharias,
after the name of the father.

His mother answered, "Not so; but
he will be called John."

They said to her, "There is no one among your relatives who
is called by this name."

They made signs to his father, what he
would have him called.

He asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, "His name is John."

 They all marveled.

His mouth was opened immediately, and his
tongue freed, and he spoke, blessing God.

Fear came on all who
lived around them, and all these sayings were talked about throughout
all the hill country of Judea.

All who heard them laid them up
in their heart, saying, "What then will this child be?" The hand of the
Lord was with him.

His father, Zacharias, was filled with the
Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,

"Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
 For he has visited and worked redemption for his people;

And has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his
 servant David

(As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been
 from of old),

Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate
 us;

To show mercy towards our fathers,
 To remember his holy covenant,

The oath which he spoke to Abraham, our father,

To grant to us that we, being delivered out of the hand of
 our enemies, should serve him without fear,

In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
 life.

And you, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High,
 For you will go before the face of the Lord to make ready his ways,

To give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission
 of their sins,

Because of the tender mercy of our God,
 Whereby the dawn from on high will visit us,

To shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death;
 To guide our feet into the way of peace."

The child was growing, and becoming strong in spirit, and was
in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.

Now it happened in those days, that a decree went out from
Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled.

This was
the first enrollment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria.

All went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city.

Joseph
also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to
the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the
house and family of David;

to enroll himself with Mary, who was
pledged to be married to him as wife, being great with child.

It happened, while they were there, that the day had come that
she should give birth.

She brought forth her firstborn son, and
she wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a feeding trough,
because there was no room for them in the inn.

There were
shepherds in the same country staying in the field, and keeping watch
by night over their flock.

Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by
them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were
terrified.

The angel said to them, "Don't be afraid, for behold,
I bring you good news of great joy which will be to all the people.

For there is born to you, this day, in the city of David, a
Savior, who is Christ the Lord.

This is the sign to you: you
will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth, lying in a feeding
trough."

Suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude of the
heavenly host praising God, and saying,

"Glory to God in the highest,
 On earth peace, good will toward men."

It happened, when the angels went away from them into the
sky, that the shepherds said one to another, "Let's go to Bethlehem,
now, and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made
known to us."

They came with haste, and found both Mary and
Joseph, and the baby lying in the feeding trough.

When they saw
it, they publicized widely the saying which was spoken to them about
this child.

All who heard it wondered at the things which were
spoken to them by the shepherds.

But Mary kept all these
sayings, pondering them in her heart.

The shepherds returned,
glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and
seen, just as it was told them.

When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of the
child, his name was called Jesus, which was given by the angel before
he was conceived in the womb.

When the days of their purification according to the law of
Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord

(as it is written in the law of the Lord, "Every
male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord"),

and
to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the
Lord, "A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons."

Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon;
and this man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of
Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him.

It had been revealed to
him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen
the Lord's Christ.

He came in the Spirit into the temple. When
the parents brought in the child, Jesus, that they might do concerning
him according to the custom of the law,

then he received him
into his arms, and blessed God, and said,

"Now you are releasing your servant, Master,
 According to your word, in peace;

For my eyes have seen your salvation,

Which you have prepared before the face of all peoples;

A light for revelation to the Gentiles,
 And the glory of your people Israel."

Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things which were
spoken concerning him,

and Simeon blessed them, and said to
Mary, his mother, "Behold, this child is set for the falling and the
rising of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against.

Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul, that the
thoughts of many hearts may be revealed."

There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband
seven years from her virginity,

and she had been a widow for
about eighty-four years), who didn't depart from the temple,
worshipping with fastings and petitions night and day.

Coming up
at that very hour, she gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of him to all
those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.

When they had accomplished all things that were according to
the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city,
Nazareth.

The child was growing, and was becoming strong in
spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.

His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the
Passover.

When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem
according to the custom of the feast,

and when they had
fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind
in Jerusalem. Joseph and his mother didn't know it,

but
supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's journey, and they
looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances.

When
they didn't find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him.

It happened after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them, and
asking them questions.

All who heard him were amazed at his
understanding and his answers.

When they saw him, they were
astonished, and his mother said to him, "Son, why have you treated us
this way? Behold, your father and I were anxiously looking for you."

He said to them, "Why were you looking for me? Didn't you
know that I must be in my Father's house?"

They didn't
understand the saying which he spoke to them.

And he went down
with them, and came to Nazareth. He was subject to them, and his mother
kept all these sayings in her heart.

And Jesus increased in
wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.

Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of
Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and
Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,

in the high
priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son
of Zacharias, in the wilderness.

He came into all the region
around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of
sins.

As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the
prophet,
"The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
 'Make ready the way of the Lord.
Make his paths straight.

Every valley will be filled.
Every mountain and hill will be brought low.
 The crooked will become straight,
 And the rough ways smooth.

All flesh will see God's salvation.'"

He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be
baptized by him, "You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from
the wrath to come?

Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance, and don't begin to say among yourselves, 'We have Abraham
for our father;' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children
to Abraham from these stones!

Even now the ax also lies at the
root of the trees. Every tree therefore that doesn't bring forth good
fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire."

The multitudes asked him, "What then must we do?"

He answered them, "He who has two coats, let him give to him
who has none. He who has food, let him do likewise."

Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to
him, "Teacher, what must we do?"

He said to them, "Collect no more than that which is
appointed to you."

Soldiers also asked him, saying, "What about us? What must we
do?"

 He said to them, "Extort from no one by violence, neither accuse
anyone wrongfully. Be content with your wages."

As the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned in
their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ,

John answered them all, "I indeed baptize you with water, but he comes
who is mightier than I, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to
loosen. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire,

whose
fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor,
and will gather the wheat into his barn; but he will burn up the chaff
with unquenchable fire."

Then with many other exhortations he preached good news to
the people,

but Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for
Herodias, his brother's wife, and for all the evil things which Herod
had done,

added this also to them all, that he shut up John in
prison.

Now it happened, when all the people were baptized,
Jesus also had been baptized, and was praying. The sky was opened,

and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove on him;
and a voice came out of the sky, saying "You are my beloved Son. In you
I am well pleased."

Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years
old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,

the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of
Jannai, the son of Joseph,

the son of Mattathias, the son of
Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,

the
son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of
Joseph, the son of Judah,

the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa,
the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,

the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of
Elmodam, the son of Er,

the son of Josa, the son of Eliezer, the
son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,

the son of
Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son
of Eliakim,

the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of
Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,

the son of Jesse,
the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of
Nahshon,

the son of Amminadab, the son of Aram, the son of
Joram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,

the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of
Terah, the son of Nahor,

the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the
son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah

the son of
Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son
of Lamech,

the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of
Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,

the son of
Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.

Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and
was led by the Spirit into the wilderness

for forty days, being
tempted by the devil. He ate nothing in those days. Afterward, when
they were completed, he was hungry.

The devil said to him, "If
you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread."

Jesus answered him, saying, "It is written, 'Man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word of God.'"

The devil, leading him up on a high mountain, showed him all
the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.

The devil said to
him, "I will give you all this authority, and their glory, for it has
been delivered to me; and I give it to whomever I want.

If you
therefore will worship before me, it will all be yours."

Jesus answered him, "Get behind me Satan! For it is written,
'You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.'"

He led him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the
temple, and said to him, "If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down
from here,

for it is written,
'He will give his angels charge concerning you, to guard you;'

and,
'On their hands they will bear you up,
 Lest perhaps you dash your foot against a stone.'"

Jesus answering, said to him, "It has been said, 'You shall
not tempt the Lord your God.'"

When the devil had completed every temptation, he departed
from him until another time.

Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and
news about him spread through all the surrounding area.

He
taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.

He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up. He
entered, as was his custom, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and
stood up to read.

The book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to
him. He opened the book, and found the place where it was written,

"The Spirit of the Lord is on me,
 Because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor.
He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted,
 To proclaim release to the captives,
 Recovering of sight to the blind,
 To deliver those who are crushed,

And to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord."

He closed the book, gave it back to the attendant, and sat
down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.

He
began to tell them, "Today, this Scripture has been fulfilled in your
hearing."

All testified about him, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth, and they said, "Isn't this Joseph's
son?"

He said to them, "Doubtless you will tell me this parable,
'Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we have heard done at Capernaum, do
also here in your hometown.'"

He said, "Most assuredly I tell
you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.

But truly I tell
you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the
the sky was shut up three years and six months, when a great famine
came over all the land.

Elijah was sent to none of them, except
to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.

There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet
not one of them was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian."

They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as they
heard these things.

They rose up, threw him out of the city, and
led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on, that they
might throw him off the cliff.

But he, passing through the midst
of them, went his way.

He came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. He was teaching
them on the Sabbath day,

and they were astonished at his
teaching, for his word was with authority.

In the synagogue
there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out
with a loud voice,

saying, "Ah! what have we to do with you,
Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are:
the Holy One of God!"

Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be silent, and come out of him!"
When the demon had thrown him down in their midst, he came out of him,
having done him no harm.

Amazement came on all, and they spoke together, one with
another, saying, "What is this word? For with authority and power he
commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!"

News about him
went out into every place of the surrounding region.

He rose up from the synagogue, and entered into Simon's
house. Simon's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they
begged him for her.

He stood over her, and rebuked the fever;
and it left her. Immediately she rose up and served them.

When
the sun was setting, all those who had any sick with various diseases
brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and
healed them.

Demons also came out from many, crying out, and
saying, "You are the Christ, the Son of God!" Rebuking them, he didn't
allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.

When it was day, he departed and went into an uninhabited
place, and the multitudes looked for him, and came to him, and held on
to him, so that he wouldn't go away from them.

But he said to
them, "I must preach the good news of the Kingdom of God to the other
cities also. For this reason I have been sent."

He was preaching
in the synagogues of Galilee.

Now it happened, while the multitude pressed on him and heard
the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret.

He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out
of them, and were washing their nets.

He entered into one of the
boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the
land. He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat.

When
he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, "Put out into the deep, and
let down your nets for a catch."

Simon answered him, "Master, we worked all night, and took
nothing; but at your word I will let down the net."

When they had
done this, they caught a great multitude of fish, and their net was
breaking.

They beckoned to their partners in the other boat, that
they should come and help them. They came, and filled both boats, so
that they began to sink.

But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell
down at Jesus' knees, saying, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man,
Lord."

For he was amazed, and all who were with him, at the catch
of fish which they had caught;

and so also were James and John,
sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon.

 Jesus said to Simon, "Don't be afraid. From now on you will be
catching people alive."

When they had brought their boats to land, they left
everything, and followed him.

It happened, while he was in one
of the cities, behold, there was a man full of leprosy. When he saw
Jesus, he fell on his face, and begged him, saying, "Lord, if you want
to, you can make me clean."

He stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, "I want
to. Be made clean."

 Immediately the leprosy left him.

He charged him to "Tell no
one, but go your way, and show yourself to the priest, and offer for
your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, for a testimony to
them."

But the report concerning him spread much more, and great
multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
infirmities.

But he withdrew himself into the desert, and prayed.

It happened on one of those days, that he was teaching; and
there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by, who had come
out of every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem. The power of the
Lord was with him to heal them.

Behold, men brought a paralyzed
man on a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus.

Not finding a way to bring him in because of the multitude, they
went up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his
cot into the midst before Jesus.

Seeing their faith, he said to
him, "Man, your sins are forgiven you."

The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, "Who
is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?"

But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them, "Why are
you reasoning so in your hearts?

Which is easier to say, 'Your
sins are forgiven you;' or to say, 'Arise and walk?'

But that
you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive
sins" (he said to the paralyzed man), "I tell you, arise, and take up
your cot, and go to your house."

Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that which he
was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God.

Amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God. They were filled
with fear, saying, "We have seen strange things today."

After these things he went out, and saw a tax collector named
Levi sitting at the tax office, and said to him, "Follow me!"

He left everything, and rose up and followed him.

Levi
made a great feast for him in his house. There was a great crowd of tax
collectors and others who were reclining with them.

Their
scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, "Why
do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?"

Jesus
answered them, "Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but
those who are sick do.

I have not come to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance."

They said to him, "Why do John's disciples often fast and
pray, likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and
drink?"

He said to them, "Can you make the friends of the bridegroom
fast, while the bridegroom is with them?

But the days will come
when the bridegroom will be taken away from them. Then they will fast
in those days."

He also told a parable to them. "No one puts a
piece from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the
new, and also the piece from the new will not match the old.

No
one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst
the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.

But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are
preserved.

No man having drunk old wine immediately desires new,
for he says, 'The old is better.'"

Now it happened on the second Sabbath after the first, that he
was going through the grain fields. His disciples plucked the heads of
grain, and ate, rubbing them in their hands.

But some of the
Pharisees said to them, "Why do you do that which is not lawful to do
on the Sabbath day?"

Jesus, answering them, said, "Haven't you read what David did
when he was hungry, he, and those who were with him;

how he
entered into the house of God, and took and ate the show bread, and
gave also to those who were with him, which is not lawful to eat except
for the priests alone?"

He said to them, "The Son of Man is lord
of the Sabbath."

It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into the
synagogue and taught. There was a man there, and his right hand was
withered.

The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see
whether he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might find an
accusation against him.

But he knew their thoughts; and he said
to the man who had the withered hand, "Rise up, and stand in the
middle." He arose and stood.

Then Jesus said to them, "I will ask
you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good, or to do harm?
To save a life, or to kill?"

He looked around at them all, and
said to him, "Stretch out your hand." He did, and his hand was restored
as sound as the other.

But they were filled with rage, and
talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus.

It happened in these days, that he went out to the mountain
to pray, and he continued all night in prayer to God.

When it
was day, he called his disciples, and from them he chose twelve, whom
he also named apostles:

Simon, whom he also named Peter; Andrew,
his brother; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew;

Matthew; Thomas;
James, the son of Alphaeus; Simon, who was called the Zealot;

Judas the son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor.

He came down with them, and stood on a level place, with a crowd
of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all Judea and
Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him
and to be healed of their diseases;

as well as those who were
troubled by unclean spirits, and they were being healed.

All the
multitude sought to touch him, for power came out from him and healed
them all.

He lifted up his eyes to his disciples, and said,
"Blessed are you poor,
 For yours is the Kingdom of God.

Blessed are you who hunger now,
 For you will be filled.
Blessed are you who weep now,
 For you will laugh.

Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall
 separate you from them and reproach you, and throw out your name
 as evil, for the Son of Man's sake.

Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your
 reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing
 to the prophets.

"But woe to you who are rich!
 For you have received your consolation.

Woe to you, you who are full now!
 For you will be hungry.
Woe to you who laugh now!
 For you will mourn and weep.

Woe, when men speak well of you!
 For their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.

"But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to those
who hate you,

bless those who curse you, and pray for those who
insult you.

To him who strikes you on the cheek, offer also the
other; and from him who takes away your cloak, don't withhold your coat
also.

Give to everyone who asks you, and don't ask him who takes
away your goods to give them back again.

"As you would like people to do to you, do exactly so to
them.

If you love those who love you, what credit is that to
you? For even sinners love those who love them.

If you do good
to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even
sinners do the same.

If you lend to those from whom you hope to
receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to
receive back as much.

But love your enemies, and do good, and
lend, expecting nothing back; and your reward will be great, and you
will be sons of the Most High; for he is kind toward the unthankful and
evil.

Therefore be merciful,
 Even as your Father is also merciful.

Don't judge,
 And you won't be judged.
Don't condemn,
 And you won't be condemned.
Set free,
 And you will be set free.

"Give, and it will be given to you: good measure, pressed
down, shaken together, and running over, will be given to you. For with
the same measure you measure it will be measured back to you."

He spoke a parable to them. "Can the blind guide the blind?
Won't they both fall into a pit?

A disciple is not above his
teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his
teacher.

Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your
brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?

Or how can you tell your brother, 'Brother, let me remove the
speck of chaff that is in your eye,' when you yourself don't see the
beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrite! First remove the beam from
your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck of chaff
that is in your brother's eye.

For there is no good tree that
brings forth rotten fruit; nor again a rotten tree that brings forth
good fruit.

For each tree is known by its own fruit. For people
don't gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble
bush.

The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings
out that which is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of
his heart brings out that which is evil, for out of the abundance of
the heart, his mouth speaks.

"Why do you call me, 'Lord, Lord,' and don't do the things
which I say?

Everyone who comes to me, and hears my words, and
does them, I will show you who he is like.

He is like a man
building a house, who dug and went deep, and laid a foundation on the
rock. When a flood arose, the stream broke against that house, and
could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock.

But he
who hears, and doesn't do, is like a man who built a house on the earth
without a foundation, against which the stream broke, and immediately
it fell, and the ruin of that house was great."

After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the people,
he entered into Capernaum.

A certain centurion's servant, who was
dear to him, was sick and at the point of death.

When he heard
about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and
save his servant.

When they came to Jesus, they begged him
earnestly, saying, "He is worthy for you to do this for him,

for
he loves our nation, and he built our synagogue for us."

Jesus
went with them. When he was now not far from the house, the centurion
sent friends to him, saying to him, "Lord, don't trouble yourself, for
I am not worthy for you to come under my roof.

Therefore I didn't
even think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my
servant will be healed.

For I also am a man placed under
authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go!' and he
goes; and to another, 'Come!' and he comes; and to my servant, 'Do
this,' and he does it."

When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turned
and said to the multitude who followed him, "I tell you, I have not
found such great faith, no, not in Israel."

Those who were sent,
returning to the house, found that the servant who had been sick was
well.

It happened soon afterwards, that he went to a city called
Nain. Many of his disciples, along with a great multitude, went with
him.

Now when he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, one
who was dead was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow. Many people of the city were with her.

When the Lord saw
her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, "Don't cry."

He
came near and touched the coffin, and the bearers stood still. He said,
"Young man, I tell you, arise!"

He who was dead sat up, and
began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.

Fear took hold of all, and they glorified God, saying, "A
great prophet has arisen among us!" and, "God has visited his people!"

This report went out concerning him in the whole of Judea, and
in all the surrounding region.

The disciples of John told him about all these things.

John, calling to himself two of his disciples, sent them to Jesus,
saying, "Are you the one who is coming, or should we look for another?"

When the men had come to him, they said, "John the Baptizer has
sent us to you, saying, 'Are you he who comes, or should we look for
another?'"

In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil
spirits; and to many who were blind he gave sight.

Jesus
answered them, "Go and tell John the things which you have seen and
heard: that the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have
good news preached to them.

Blessed is he who is not offended by
me."

When John's messengers had departed, he began to tell the
multitudes about John, "What did you go out into the wilderness to see?
A reed shaken by the wind?

But what did you go out to see? A man
clothed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously dressed, and
live delicately, are in kings' courts.

But what did you go out
to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.

This is he of whom it is written,
'Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
 Who will prepare your way before you.'

"For I tell you, among those who are born of women there is
not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer, yet he who is least in
the Kingdom of God is greater than he."

When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they
declared God to be just, having been baptized with John's baptism.

But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God,
not being baptized by him themselves.

The Lord said, "To what then will I liken the people of this
generation? What are they like?

They are like children who sit
in the marketplace, and call one to another, saying, 'We piped to you,
and you didn't dance. We mourned, and you didn't weep.'

For John
the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say,
'He has a demon.'

The Son of Man has come eating and drinking,
and you say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man, and a drunkard; a friend of tax
collectors and sinners!'

Wisdom is justified by all her
children."

One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. He entered
into the Pharisee's house, and sat at the table.

Behold, a woman
in the city who was a sinner, when she knew that he was reclining in
the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster jar of ointment.

Standing behind at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her
tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet,
and anointed them with the ointment.

Now when the Pharisee who
had invited him saw it, he said to himself, "This man, if he were a
prophet, would have perceived who and what kind of woman this is who
touches him, that she is a sinner."

Jesus answered him, "Simon, I have something to tell you."

 He said, "Teacher, say on."

"A certain lender had two debtors. The one owed five hundred
denarii, and the other fifty.

When they couldn't pay, he forgave
them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?"

Simon answered, "He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most."

 He said to him, "You have judged correctly."

Turning to the
woman, he said to Simon, "Do you see this woman? I entered into your
house, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet
with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head.

You
gave me no kiss, but she, since the time I came in, has not ceased to
kiss my feet.

You didn't anoint my head with oil, but she has
anointed my feet with ointment.

Therefore I tell you, her sins,
which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. But to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little."

He said to her, "Your sins are
forgiven."

Those who sat at the table with him began to say to
themselves, "Who is this who even forgives sins?"

He said to the woman, "Your faith has saved you. Go in peace."

It happened soon afterwards, that he went about through cities
and villages, preaching and bringing the good news of the Kingdom of
God. With him were the twelve,

and certain women who had been
healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene,
from whom seven demons had gone out;

and Joanna, the wife of
Chuzas, Herod's steward; Susanna; and many others; who ministered to
them from their possessions.

When a great multitude came
together, and people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a
parable.

"The farmer went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some
fell along the road, and it was trampled under foot, and the birds of
the sky devoured it.

Other seed fell on the rock, and as soon as
it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture.

Other fell
amid the thorns, and the thorns grew with it, and choked it.

Other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit one
hundred times." As he said these things, he called out, "He who has
ears to hear, let him hear!"

Then his disciples asked him, "What does this parable mean?"

He said, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, but to the rest in parables; that 'seeing they may not
see, and hearing they may not understand.'

Now the parable is
this: The seed is the word of God.

Those along the road are
those who hear, then the devil comes, and takes away the word from
their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.

Those on
the rock are they who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; but
these have no root, who believe for a while, then fall away in time of
temptation.

That which fell among the thorns, these are those
who have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares,
riches, and pleasures of life, and bring no fruit to maturity.

That in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and good heart,
having heard the word, hold it tightly, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

"No one, when he has lit a lamp, covers it with a container,
or puts it under a bed; but puts it on a stand, that those who enter in
may see the light.

For nothing is hidden, that will not be
revealed; nor anything secret, that will not be known and come to
light.

Be careful therefore how you hear. For whoever has, to
him will be given; and whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken
away even that which he thinks he has."

His mother and brothers came to him, and they could not come
near him for the crowd.

It was told him by some saying, "Your
mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you."

But he answered them, "My mother and my brothers are these
who hear the word of God, and do it."

Now it happened on one of those days, that he entered into a
boat, himself and his disciples, and he said to them, "Let's go over to
the other side of the lake." So they launched out.

But as they
sailed, he fell asleep. A wind storm came down on the lake, and they
were taking on dangerous amounts of water.

They came to him, and
awoke him, saying, "Master, master, we are dying!" He awoke, and
rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it
was calm.

He said to them, "Where is your faith?" Being afraid
they marveled, saying one to another, "Who is this, then, that he
commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?"

They
arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.

When Jesus stepped ashore, a certain man out of the city who
had demons for a long time met him. He wore no clothes, and didn't live
in a house, but in the tombs.

When he saw Jesus, he cried out,
and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, "What do I have
to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't
torment me!"

For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come
out of the man. For the unclean spirit had often seized the man. He was
kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters. Breaking the bands
apart, he was driven by the demon into the desert.

Jesus asked him, "What is your name?"

 He said, "Legion," for many demons had entered into him.

They
begged him that he would not command them to go into the abyss.

Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the mountain, and
they begged him that he would allow them to enter into those. He
allowed them.

The demons came out from the man, and entered into
the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake, and
were drowned.

When those who fed them saw what had happened,
they fled, and told it in the city and in the country.

People went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus,
and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus'
feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.

Those
who saw it told them how he who had been possessed by demons was
healed.

All the people of the surrounding country of the
Gadarenes asked him to depart from them, for they were very much
afraid. He entered into the boat, and returned.

But the man from
whom the demons had gone out begged him that he might go with him, but
Jesus sent him away, saying,

"Return to your house, and declare
what great things God has done for you." He went his way, proclaiming
throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.

It happened, when Jesus returned, that the multitude welcomed
him, for they were all waiting for him.

Behold, there came a man
named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at
Jesus' feet, and begged him to come into his house,

for he had
an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. But as
he went, the multitudes thronged him.

A woman who had a flow of
blood for twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and
could not be healed by any,

came behind him, and touched the
fringe of his cloak, and immediately the flow of her blood stopped.

Jesus said, "Who touched me?"

 When all denied it, Peter and those with him said, "Master, the
multitudes press and jostle you, and you say, 'Who touched me?'"

But Jesus said, "Someone did touch me, for I perceived that
power has gone out of me."

When the woman saw that she was not
hidden, she came trembling, and falling down before him declared to him
in the presence of all the people the reason why she had touched him,
and how she was healed immediately.

He said to her, "Daughter,
cheer up. Your faith has made you well. Go in peace."

While he still spoke, one from the ruler of the synagogue's
house came, saying to him, "Your daughter is dead. Don't trouble the
Teacher."

But Jesus hearing it, answered him, "Don't be afraid. Only
believe, and she will be healed."

When he came to the house, he didn't allow anyone to enter
in, except Peter, John, James, the father of the girl, and her mother.

All were weeping and mourning her, but he said, "Don't weep. She
isn't dead, but sleeping."

They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

But he put them all outside, and taking her by the hand, he called,
saying, "Little girl, arise!"

Her spirit returned, and she rose
up immediately. He commanded that something be given to her to eat.

Her parents were amazed, but he charged them to tell no one what
had been done.

He called the twelve together, and gave them power and
authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.

He sent them
forth to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.

He said
to them, "Take nothing for your journey -- neither staffs, nor wallet,
nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats apiece.

Into
whatever house you enter, stay there, and depart from there.

As
many as don't receive you, when you depart from that city, shake off
even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them."

They departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the
gospel, and healing everywhere.

Now Herod the tetrarch heard of
all that was done by him; and he was very perplexed, because it was
said by some that John had risen from the dead,

and by some that
Elijah had appeared, and by others that one of the old prophets had
risen again.

Herod said, "John I beheaded, but who is this, about
whom I hear such things?" He sought to see him.

The apostles,
when they had returned, told him what things they had done.

 He took them, and withdrew apart to a deserted place of a city
called Bethsaida.

But the multitudes, perceiving it, followed
him. He welcomed them, and spoke to them of the Kingdom of God, and he
cured those who needed healing.

The day began to wear away; and
the twelve came, and said to him, "Send the multitude away, that they
may go into the surrounding villages and farms, and lodge, and get
provisions, for we are here in a deserted place."

But he said to them, "You give them something to eat."

 They said, "We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we
should go and buy food for all these people."

For they were
about five thousand men.

 He said to his disciples, "Make them sit down in groups of about
fifty each."

They did so, and made them all sit down.

He
took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to the sky, he
blessed them, and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set
before the multitude.

They ate, and were all filled. They
gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over.

It happened, as he was praying alone, that the disciples were
with him, and he asked them, "Who do the multitudes say that I am?"

They answered, "'John the Baptizer,' but others say,
'Elijah,' and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again."

He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?"

 Peter answered, "The Christ of God."

But he warned them, and commanded them to tell this to no
one,

saying, "The Son of Man must suffer many things, and be
rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and
the third day be raised up."

He said to all, "If anyone desires to come after me, let him
deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.

For whoever
desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life
for my sake, the same will save it.

For what does it profit a
man if he gains the whole world, and loses or forfeits his own self?

For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will
the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and the glory of
the Father, and of the holy angels.

But I tell you the truth:
There are some of those who stand here, who will in no way taste of
death, until they see the Kingdom of God."

It happened about eight days after these sayings, that he
took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up onto the mountain to
pray.

As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered,
and his clothing became white and dazzling.

Behold, two men were
talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah,

who appeared in
glory, and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at
Jerusalem.

Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep,
but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men who
stood with him.

It happened, as they were parting from him, that
Peter said to Jesus, "Master, it is good for us to be here. Let's make
three tents: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah," not
knowing what he said.

While he said these things, a cloud came and overshadowed
them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.

A
voice came out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son. Listen to
him!"

When the voice came, Jesus was found alone. They were
silent, and told no one in those days any of the things which they had
seen.

It happened on the next day, when they had come down from the
mountain, that a great multitude met him.

Behold, a man from the
crowd called out, saying, "Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he
is my only child.

Behold, a spirit takes him, he suddenly cries
out, and it convulses him so that he foams, and it hardly departs from
him, bruising him severely.

I begged your disciples to cast it
out, and they couldn't."

Jesus answered, "Faithless and perverse generation, how long
shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here."

While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and
convulsed him violently. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and
healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.

They were all
astonished at the majesty of God.

 But while all were marveling at all the things which Jesus did, he
said to his disciples,

"Let these words sink into your ears, for
the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men."

But
they didn't understand this saying. It was concealed from them, that
they should not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this
saying.

There arose an argument among them about which of them was
the greatest.

Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their hearts,
took a little child, and set him by his side,

and said to them,
"Whoever receives this little child in my name receives me. Whoever
receives me receives him who sent me. For whoever is least among you
all, this one will be great."

John answered, "Master, we saw someone casting out demons in
your name, and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow with us."

Jesus said to him, "Don't forbid him, for he who is not
against us is for us."

It came to pass, when the days were near that he should be
taken up, he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem,

and sent
messengers before his face. They went, and entered into a village of
the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him.

They didn't receive
him, because he was traveling with his face set towards Jerusalem.

When his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, "Lord,
do you want us to command fire to come down from the sky, and destroy
them, just as Elijah did?"

But he turned and rebuked them, "You don't know of what kind
of spirit you are.

For the Son of Man didn't come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them."

 They went to another village.

As they went on the way, a
certain man said to him, "I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord."

Jesus said to him, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of
the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head."

He said to another, "Follow me!"

 But he said, "Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."

But Jesus said to him, "Leave the dead to bury their own
dead, but you go and announce the Kingdom of God."

Another also said, "I want to follow you, Lord, but first
allow me to bid farewell to those who are at my house."

But Jesus said to him, "No one, having put his hand to the
plow, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God."

Now after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy
others, and sent them two by two before his face into every city and
place, where he was about to come.

Then he said to them, "The
harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore
to the Lord of the harvest, that he may send out laborers into his
harvest.

Go your ways. Behold, I send you out as lambs among
wolves.

Carry no purse, nor wallet, nor sandals. Greet no one on
the way.

Into whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to
this house.'

If a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on
him; but if not, it will return to you.

Remain in that same
house, eating and drinking the things they give, for the laborer is
worthy of his wages. Don't go from house to house.

Into whatever
city you enter, and they receive you, eat the things that are set
before you.

Heal the sick who are therein, and tell them, 'The
Kingdom of God has come near to you.'

But into whatever city
you enter, and they don't receive you, go out into the streets of it
and say,

'Even the dust from your city that clings to us, we
wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the Kingdom of God
has come near to you.'

I tell you, it will be more tolerable in
that day for Sodom than for that city.

"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the
mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you,
they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.

But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the
judgment than for you.

You, Capernaum, who are exalted to
heaven, will be brought down to Hades.

Whoever listens to you
listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me. Whoever rejects me
rejects him who sent me."

The seventy returned with joy, saying, "Lord, even the
demons are subject to us in your name!"

He said to them, "I saw Satan having fallen like lightning
from heaven.

Behold, I give you authority to tread on serpents
and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. Nothing will in any
way hurt you.

Nevertheless, don't rejoice in this, that the
spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in
heaven."

In that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and
said, "I thank you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have
hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them
to little children. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your
sight."

Turning to the disciples, he said, "All things have been
delivered to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is, except the
Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever the
Son desires to reveal him."

Turning to the disciples, he said privately, "Blessed are
the eyes which see the things that you see,

for I tell you that
many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see, and
didn't see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear
them."

Behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tested him, saying,
"Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

He said to him, "What is written in the law? How do you read
it?"

He answered, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your
heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your
mind; and your neighbor as yourself."

He said to him, "You have answered correctly. Do this, and
you will live."

But he, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, "Who is my
neighbor?"

Jesus answered, "A certain man was going down from Jerusalem
to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him and beat
him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

By chance a certain
priest was going down that way. When he saw him, he passed by on the
other side.

In the same way a Levite also, when he came to the
place, and saw him, passed by on the other side.

But a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was. When he saw him, he was
moved with compassion,

came to him, and bound up his wounds,
pouring on oil and wine. He set him on his own animal, and brought him
to an inn, and took care of him.

On the next day, when he
departed, he took out two denarii, and gave them to the host, and said
to him, 'Take care of him. Whatever you spend beyond that, I will repay
you when I return.'

Now which of these three do you think
seemed to be a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers?"

He said, "He who showed mercy on him."

 Then Jesus said to him, "Go and do likewise."

It happened as they went on their way, he entered into a
certain village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her
house.

She had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus'
feet, and heard his word.

But Martha was distracted with much
serving, and she came up to him, and said, "Lord, don't you care that
my sister left me to serve alone? Ask her therefore to help me."

Jesus answered her, "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and
troubled about many things,

but one thing is needed. Mary has
chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her."

It happened, that when he finished praying in a certain
place, one of his disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray, just
as John also taught his disciples."

He said to them, "When you pray, say,
'Our Father in heaven,
 May your name be kept holy.
May your kingdom come.
 May your will be done on Earth, as it is in heaven.

Give us day by day our daily bread.

Forgive us our sins,
 For we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us.
Bring us not into temptation,
 But deliver us from the evil one.'"

He said to them, "Which of you, if you go to a friend at
midnight, and tell him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,

for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing
to set before him,'

and he from within will answer and say,
'Don't bother me. The door is now shut, and my children are with me in
bed. I can't get up and give it to you'?

I tell you, although he
will not rise and give it to him because he is his friend, yet because
of his persistence, he will get up and give him as many as he needs.

"I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you. Keep
seeking, and you will find. Keep knocking, and it will be opened to
you.

For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him
who knocks it will be opened.

"Which of you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will give
him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he won't give him a snake
instead of a fish, will he?

Or if he asks for an egg, he won't
give him a scorpion, will he?

If you then, being evil, know how
to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?"

He was casting out a demon, and it was mute. It happened,
when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke; and the multitudes
marveled.

But some of them said, "He casts out demons by
Beelzebul, the prince of the demons."

Others, testing him,
sought from him a sign from heaven.

But he, knowing their
thoughts, said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is
brought to desolation. A house divided against itself falls.

If
Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For
you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.

But if I cast out
demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore will
they be your judges.

But if I by the finger of God cast out
demons, then the Kingdom of God has come to you.

"When the strong man, fully armed, guards his own dwelling,
his goods are safe.

But when someone stronger attacks him and
overcomes him, he takes from him his whole armor in which he trusted,
and divides his spoils.

"He that is not with me is against me. He who doesn't gather
with me scatters.

The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of
the man, passes through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, he
says, 'I will turn back to my house from which I came out.'

When he returns, he finds it swept and put in order.

Then he
goes, and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they
enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than
the first."

It came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman
out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, "Blessed is
the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!"

But he said, "On the contrary, blessed are those who hear
the word of God, and keep it."

When the multitudes were gathering together to him, he began
to say, "This is an evil generation. It seeks after a sign. No sign
will be given to it but the sign of Jonah, the prophet.

For
even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will also the Son of
Man be to this generation.

The Queen of the South will rise up
in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them:
for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, one greater than Solomon is here.

The men of
Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will
condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold,
one greater than Jonah is here.

"No man, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a cellar, nor
under a basket, but on a stand, that those who enter in may see the
light.

The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore when your eye
is good, your whole body is also full of light; but when it is evil,
your body also is full of darkness.

Therefore see whether the
light that is in you isn't darkness.

If therefore your whole
body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly full of
light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light."

Now as he spoke, a certain Pharisee asked him to dine with
him. He went in, and sat at the table.

When the Pharisee saw
it, he marveled that he had not first washed himself before dinner.

The Lord said to him, "Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of
the cup and of the platter, but your inward part is full of extortion
and wickedness.

You foolish ones, didn't he who made the
outside make the inside also?

But give for gifts to the needy
those things which are within, and behold, all things will be clean to
you.

But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and
every herb, but you bypass justice and the love of God. You ought to
have done these, and not to have left the other undone.

Woe to
you Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues, and the
greetings in the marketplaces.

Woe to you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like hidden graves, and the men who
walk over them don't know it."

One of the lawyers answered him, "Teacher, in saying this
you insult us also."

He said, "Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with
burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves won't even lift
one finger to help carry those burdens.

Woe to you! For you
build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.

So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers. For they
killed them, and you build their tombs.

Therefore also the
wisdom of God said, 'I will send to them prophets and apostles; and
some of them they will kill and persecute,

that the blood of
all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may
be required of this generation;

from the blood of Abel to the
blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary.'
Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.

Woe to
you lawyers! For you took away the key of knowledge. You didn't enter
in yourselves, and those who were entering in, you hindered."

As he said these things to them, the scribes and the
Pharisees began to be terribly angry, and to draw many things out of
him;

lying in wait for him, and seeking to catch him in
something he might say, that they might accuse him.

Meanwhile, when a multitude of many thousands had gathered
together, so much so that they trampled on each other, he began to tell
his disciples first of all, "Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy.

But there is nothing covered up, that will
not be revealed, nor hidden, that will not be known.

Therefore
whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light. What
you have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers will be proclaimed on
the housetops.

"I tell you, my friends, don't be afraid of those who kill
the body, and after that have no more that they can do.

But I
will warn you whom you should fear. Fear him, who after he has killed,
has power to cast into Gehenna. Yes, I tell you, fear him.

"Aren't five sparrows sold for two assaria? Not one of them
is forgotten by God.

But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many
sparrows.

"I tell you, everyone who confesses me before men, him will
the Son of Man also confess before the angels of God;

but he who
denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the
angels of God.

Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of
Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit
will not be forgiven.

When they bring you before the
synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, don't be anxious how or
what you will answer, or what you will say;

for the Holy Spirit
will teach you in that same hour what you must say."

One of the multitude said to him, "Teacher, tell my brother
to divide the inheritance with me."

But he said to him, "Man, who made me a judge or an
arbitrator over you?"

He said to them, "Beware! Keep yourselves
from covetousness, for a man's life doesn't consist of the abundance of
the things which he possesses."

He spoke a parable to them, saying, "The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth abundantly.

He reasoned within himself,
saying, 'What will I do, because I don't have room to store my crops?'

He said, 'This is what I will do. I will pull down my barns,
and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my
goods.

I will tell my soul, "Soul, you have many goods laid up
for many years. Take your ease, eat, drink, be merry."'

"But God said to him, 'You foolish one, tonight your soul is
required of you. The things which you have prepared -- whose will they
be?'

So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich
toward God."

He said to his disciples, "Therefore I tell you, don't be
anxious for your life, what you will eat, nor yet for your body, what
you will wear.

Life is more than food, and the body is more
than clothing.

Consider the ravens: they don't sow, they don't
reap, they have no warehouse or barn, and God feeds them. How much more
valuable are you than birds!

Which of you by being anxious can
add a cubit to his height?

If then you aren't able to do even
the least things, why are you anxious about the rest?

Consider
the lilies, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin; yet I
tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these.

But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field,
which today exists, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more
will he clothe you, O you of little faith?

Don't seek what you
will eat or what you will drink; neither be anxious.

For the
nations of the world seek after all of these things, but your Father
knows that you need these things.

But seek God's Kingdom, and
all these things will be added to you.

Don't be afraid, little
flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

Sell that which you have, and give gifts to the needy. Make for
yourselves purses which don't grow old, a treasure in the heavens that
doesn't fail, where no thief approaches, neither moth destroys.

For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

"Let your loins be girded and your lamps burning.

Be
like men watching for their lord, when he returns from the marriage
feast; that, when he comes and knocks, they may immediately open to
him.

Blessed are those servants, whom the lord will find
watching when he comes. Most assuredly I tell you, that he will dress
himself, and make them recline, and will come and serve them.

They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third watch, and
finds them so.

But know this, that if the master of the house
had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched, and
not allowed his house to be broken into.

Therefore be ready
also, for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you don't expect
him."

Peter said to him, "Lord, are you telling this parable to
us, or to everybody?"

The Lord said, "Who then is the faithful and wise steward,
whom his lord will set over his household, to give them their portion
of food at the right times?

Blessed is that servant whom his
lord will find doing so when he comes.

Truly I tell you, that
he will set him over all that he has.

But if that servant says
in his heart, 'My lord delays his coming,' and begins to beat the
menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be
drunken,

then the lord of that servant will come in a day when
he isn't expecting him, and in an hour that he doesn't know, and will
cut him in two, and place his portion with the unfaithful.

That
servant, who knew his lord's will, and didn't prepare, nor do what he
wanted, will be beaten with many stripes,

but he who didn't
know, and did things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few
stripes. To whoever much is given, of him will much be required; and to
whom much was entrusted, of him more will be asked.

"I came to throw fire on the earth. I wish it were already
kindled.

But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how
distressed I am until it is accomplished!

Do you think that I
have come to give peace in the earth? I tell you, no, but rather
division.

For from now on, there will be five in one house
divided, three against two, and two against three.

They will be
divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against
daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother-in-law against her
daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law."

He said to the multitudes also, "When you see a cloud rising
from the west, immediately you say, 'A shower is coming,' and so it
happens.

When a south wind blows, you say, 'There will be a
scorching heat,' and it happens.

You hypocrites! You know how
to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how is it
that you don't interpret this time?

Why don't you judge for
yourselves what is right?

For when you are going with your
adversary before the magistrate, try diligently on the way to be
released from him, lest perhaps he drag you to the judge, and the judge
deliver you to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.

I tell you, you will by no means get out of there, until you
have paid the very last penny."

Now there were some present at the same time who told him
about the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mixed with their
sacrifices.

Jesus answered them, "Do you think that these
Galilaeans were worse sinners than all the other Galilaeans, because
they suffered such things?

I tell you, no, but, unless you
repent, you will all perish in the same way.

Or those eighteen,
on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think that
they were worse offenders than all the men who dwell in Jerusalem?

I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish in
the same way."

He spoke this parable. "A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none.

He said to the vine dresser, 'Behold, these three years I have
come looking for fruit on this fig tree, and found none. Cut it down.
Why does it waste the soil?'

He answered, 'Lord, leave it alone
this year also, until I dig around it, and fertilize it.

If it
bears fruit, fine; but if not, after that, you can cut it down.'"

He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day.

Behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and she was bent over, and could in no way straighten
herself up.

When Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her,
"Woman, you are freed from your infirmity."

He laid his hands
on her, and immediately she stood up straight, and glorified God.

The ruler of the synagogue, being indignant because Jesus
had healed on the Sabbath, said to the multitude, "There are six days
in which men ought to work. Therefore come on those days and be healed,
and not on the Sabbath day!"

Therefore the Lord answered him, "You hypocrites! Doesn't
each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the
Sabbath, and lead him away to water?

Ought not this woman,
being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound eighteen long years,
be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?"

As he said these things, all his adversaries were put to
shame, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that
were done by him.

He said, "What is the Kingdom of God like? To what shall I
compare it?

It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man
took, and put in his own garden. It grew, and became a large tree, and
the birds of the sky lodged in its branches."

Again he said, "To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God?

It is like yeast, which a woman took and hid in three sata of
flour, until it was all leavened."

He went on his way through cities and villages, teaching,
and traveling on to Jerusalem.

One said to him, "Lord, are they
few who are saved?"

 He said to them,

"Strive to enter in by the narrow door, for
many, I tell you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.

When once the master of the house has risen up, and has shut the door,
and you begin to stand outside, and to knock at the door, saying,
'Lord, Lord, open to us!' then he will answer and tell you, 'I don't
know you or where you come from.'

Then you will begin to say,
'We ate and drink in your presence, and you taught in our streets.'

He will say, 'I tell you, I don't know where you come from.
Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.'

There will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
all the prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and yourselves being thrown
outside.

They will come from the east, west, north, and south,
and will sit down in the Kingdom of God.

Behold, there are some
who are last who will be first, and there are some who are first who
will be last."

On that same day, some Pharisees came, saying to him, "Get
out of here, and go away, for Herod wants to kill you."

He said to them, "Go and tell that fox, 'Behold, I cast out
demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I
complete my mission.

Nevertheless I must go on my way today and
tomorrow and the next day, for it can't be that a prophet perish
outside of Jerusalem.'

"Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets, and stones
those who are sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children
together, like a hen gathers her own brood under her wings, and you
refused!

Behold, your house is left to you desolate. I tell
you, you will not see me, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in
the name of the Lord!'"

It happened, when he went into the house of one of the rulers
of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching
him.

Behold, a certain man who had dropsy was in front of him.

Jesus, answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying,
"Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?"

But they were silent.

 He took him, and healed him, and let him go.

He answered
them, "Which of you, if your son or an ox fell into a well, wouldn't
immediately pull him out on a Sabbath day?"

They couldn't answer him regarding these things.

He spoke a parable to those who were invited, when he noticed
how they chose the best seats, and said to them,

"When you are
invited by anyone to a marriage feast, don't sit in the best seat,
since perhaps someone more honorable than you might be invited by him,

and he who invited both of you would come and tell you, 'Make
room for this person.' Then you would begin, with shame, to take the
lowest place.

But when you are invited, go and sit in the
lowest place, so that when he who invited you comes, he may tell you,
'Friend, move up higher.' Then you will be honored in the presence of
all who sit at the table with you.

For everyone who exalts
himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted."

He also said to the one who had invited him, "When you make
a dinner or a supper, don't call your friends, nor your brothers, nor
your kinsmen, nor rich neighbors, or perhaps they might also return the
favor, and pay you back.

But when you make a feast, ask the
poor, the maimed, the lame, or the blind;

and you will be
blessed, because they don't have the resources to repay you. For you
will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous."

When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these
things, he said to him, "Blessed is he who will feast in the Kingdom of
God!"

But he said to him, "A certain man made a great supper, and
he invited many people.

He sent out his servant at supper time
to tell those who were invited, 'Come, for everything is ready now.'

They all as one began to make excuses.

 "The first said to him, 'I have bought a field, and I must go and
see it. Please have me excused.'

"Another said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I must
go try them out. Please have me excused.'

"Another said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I can't
come.'

"That servant came, and told his lord these things. Then the
master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly
into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor, maimed,
blind, and lame.'

"The servant said, 'Lord, it is done as you commanded, and
there is still room.'

"The lord said to the servant, 'Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will
taste of my supper.'"

Now great multitudes were going with him. He turned and said
to them,

"If anyone comes to me, and doesn't hate his own
father, mother, wife, children, brothers, and sisters, yes, and his own
life also, he can't be my disciple.

Whoever doesn't bear his
own cross, and come after me, can't be my disciple.

For which
of you, desiring to build a tower, doesn't first sit down and count the
cost, to see if he has enough to complete it?

Or perhaps, when
he has laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, everyone who sees
begins to mock him,

saying, 'This man began to build, and
wasn't able to finish.'

Or what king, as he goes to encounter
another king in war, will not sit down first and consider whether he is
able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty
thousand?

Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he
sends an envoy, and asks for conditions of peace.

So therefore
whoever of you who doesn't renounce all that he has, he can't be my
disciple.

Salt is good, but if the salt becomes flat and
tasteless, with what do you season it?

It is fit neither for
the soil nor for the manure pile. It is thrown out. He who has ears to
hear, let him hear."

Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to
him to hear him.

The Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying,
"This man welcomes sinners, and eats with them."

He told them this parable.

"Which of you men, if you
had one hundred sheep, and lost one of them, wouldn't leave the
ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one that was lost,
until he found it?

When he has found it, he carries it on his
shoulders, rejoicing.

When he comes home, he calls together his
friends and his neighbors, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have
found my sheep which was lost!'

I tell you that even so there
will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over
ninety-nine righteous people who need no repentance.

Or what
woman, if she had ten drachma coins, if she lost one drachma, wouldn't
light a lamp, sweep the house, and seek diligently until she found it?

When she has found it, she calls together her friends and
neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which
I had lost.'

Even so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence
of the angels of God over one sinner repenting."

He said, "A certain man had two sons.

The younger of
them said to his father, 'Father, give me my share of your property.'
He divided his livelihood between them.

Not many days after,
the younger son gathered all of this together and took his journey into
a far country. There he wasted his property with riotous living.

When he had spent all of it, there arose a severe famine in
that country, and he began to be in need.

He went and joined
himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into
his fields to feed pigs.

He wanted to fill his belly with the
husks that the pigs ate, but no one gave him any.

But when he
came to himself he said, 'How many hired servants of my father's have
bread enough to spare, and I'm dying with hunger!

I will get up
and go to my father, and will tell him, "Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and in your sight.

I am no more worthy to be called
your son. Make me as one of your hired servants."'

"He arose, and came to his father. But while he was still
far off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran,
and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

The son said to him,
'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight. I am no
longer worthy to be called your son.'

"But the father said to his servants, 'Bring out the best
robe, and put it on him. Put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.

Bring the fattened calf, kill it, and let us eat, and
celebrate;

for this, my son, was dead, and is alive again. He
was lost, and is found.' They began to celebrate.

"Now his elder son was in the field. As he came near to the
house, he heard music and dancing.

He called one of the
servants to him, and asked what was going on.

He said to him,
'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf,
because he has received him back safe and healthy.'

But he was
angry, and would not go in. Therefore his father came out, and begged
him.

But he answered his father, 'Behold, these many years I
have served you, and I never disobeyed a commandment of yours, but you
never gave me a goat, that I might celebrate with my friends.

But when this, your son, came, who has devoured your living with
prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him.'

"He said to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that
is mine is yours.

But it was appropriate to celebrate and be
glad, for this, your brother, was dead, and is alive again. He was
lost, and is found.'"

He also said to his disciples, "There was a certain rich man
who had a manager. An accusation was made to him that this man was
wasting his possessions.

He called him, and said to him, 'What
is this that I hear about you? Give an accounting of your management,
for you can no longer be manager.'

"The manager said within himself, 'What will I do, seeing
that my lord is taking away the management position from me? I don't
have strength to dig. I am ashamed to beg.

I know what I will
do, so that when I am removed from management, they may receive me into
their houses.'

Calling each one of his lord's debtors to him, he
said to the first, 'How much do you owe to my lord?'

He said, 'A
hundred batos of oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and sit down
quickly and write fifty.'

Then said he to another, 'How much do
you owe?' He said, 'A hundred cors of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take
your bill, and write eighty.'

"His lord commended the dishonest manager because he had done
wisely, for the sons of this world are, in their own generation, wiser
than the sons of the light.

I tell you, make for yourselves
friends by means of unrighteous mammon, so that when you fail, they may
receive you into the eternal tents.

He who is faithful in a
very little is faithful also in much. He who is dishonest in a very
little is also dishonest in much.

If therefore you have not
been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust
the true riches?

If you have not been faithful in that which is
another's, who will give you that which is your own?

No servant
can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. You aren't
able to serve God and mammon."

The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, also heard all
these things, and they scoffed at him.

He said to them, "You
are those who justify yourselves in the sight of men, but God knows
your hearts. For that which is exalted among men is an abomination in
the sight of God.

The law and the prophets were until John.
From that time the gospel of the Kingdom of God is preached, and
everyone is forcing his way into it.

But it is easier for
heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the
law to fall.

Everyone who divorces his wife, and marries
another, commits adultery. He who marries one who is divorced from a
husband commits adultery.

"Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in
purple and fine linen, living in luxury every day.

A certain
beggar, named Lazarus, was laid at his gate, full of sores,

and
desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table.
Yes, even the dogs came and licked his sores.

It happened that
the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels to
Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried.

In
Hades, he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and saw Abraham far
off, and Lazarus at his bosom.

He cried and said, 'Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of
his finger in water, and cool my tongue! For I am in anguish in this
flame.'

"But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that you, in your
lifetime, received your good things, and Lazarus, in like manner, bad
things. But now here he is comforted and you are in anguish.

Besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that
those who want to pass from here to you are not able, and that none may
cross over from there to us.'

"He said, 'I ask you therefore, father, that you would send
him to my father's house;

for I have five brothers, that he may
testify to them, so they won't also come into this place of torment.'

"But Abraham said to him, 'They have Moses and the prophets.
Let them listen to them.'

"He said, 'No, father Abraham, but if one goes to them from
the dead, they will repent.'

"He said to him, 'If they don't listen to Moses and the
prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rises from the dead.'"

He said to the disciples, "It is impossible that no occasions
of stumbling should come, but woe to him through whom they come!

It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck,
and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that he should cause one
of these little ones to stumble.

Be careful. If your brother
sins against you, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him.

If he
sins against you seven times in the day, and seven times turns again,
saying, 'I repent,' you shall forgive him."

The apostles said to the Lord, "Increase our faith."

The Lord said, "If you had faith like a grain of mustard
seed, you would tell this sycamore tree, 'Be uprooted, and be planted
in the sea,' and it would obey you.

But who is there among you,
having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say, when he comes
in from the field, 'Come immediately and sit down at the table,'

and will not rather tell him, 'Prepare my supper, clothe yourself
properly, and serve me, while I eat and drink. Afterward you shall eat
and drink?'

Does he thank that servant because he did the things
that were commanded? I think not.

Even so you also, when you
have done all the things that are commanded you, say, 'We are unworthy
servants. We have done our duty.'"

It happened as he was on his way to Jerusalem, that he was
passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee.

As he entered
into a certain village, ten men who were lepers met him, who stood at a
distance.

They lifted up their voices, saying, "Jesus, Master,
have mercy on us!"

When he saw them, he said to them, "Go and show yourselves
to the priests." It happened that as they went, they were cleansed.

One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back,
glorifying God with a loud voice.

He fell on his face at Jesus'
feet, giving him thanks; and he was a Samaritan.

Jesus
answered, "Weren't the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?

Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this
stranger?"

Then he said to him, "Get up, and go your way. Your
faith has healed you."

Being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God would
come, he answered them, "The Kingdom of God doesn't come with
observation;

neither will they say, 'Look, here!' or, 'Look,
there!' for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you."

He said to the disciples, "The days will come, when you will
desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see
it.

They will tell you, 'Look, here!' or 'Look, there!' Don't
go away, nor follow after them,

for as the lightning, when it
flashes out of the one part under the sky, shines to the other part
under the sky; so will the Son of Man be in his day.

But first,
he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.

As it happened in the days of Noah, even so will it be also in the days
of the Son of Man.

They ate, they drank, they married, they
were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
and the flood came, and destroyed them all.

Likewise, even as
it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they built;

but in the day that Lot went
out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur from the sky, and destroyed
them all.

It will be the same way in the day that the Son of
Man is revealed.

In that day, he who will be on the housetop,
and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away. Let
him who is in the field likewise not turn back.

Remember Lot's
wife!

Whoever seeks to save his life loses it, but whoever
loses his life preserves it.

I tell you, in that night there
will be two people in one bed. The one will be taken, and the other
will be left.

There will be two women grinding together. The
one will be taken, and the other will be left."



They answering, asked him, "Where, Lord?"

 He said to them, "Where the body is, there will the vultures also be
gathered together."

He also spoke a parable to them that they must always pray,
and not give up,

saying, "There was a judge in a certain city
who didn't fear God, and didn't respect man.

A widow was in that
city, and she often came to him, saying, 'Defend me from my adversary!'

He wouldn't for a while, but afterward he said to himself,
'Though I neither fear God, nor respect man,

yet because this
widow bothers me, I will defend her, or else she will wear me out by
her continual coming.'"

The Lord said, "Listen to what the unrighteous judge says.

Won't God avenge his elect, who are crying out to him day and
night, and yet he exercises patience with them?

I tell you that
he will avenge them quickly. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes,
will he find faith on the earth?"

He spoke also this parable to certain people who were
convinced of their own righteousness, and who despised all others.

"Two men went up into the temple to pray; one was a Pharisee,
and the other was a tax collector.

The Pharisee stood and
prayed to himself like this: 'God, I thank you, that I am not like the
rest of men, extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this
tax collector.

I fast twice a week. I give tithes of all that I
get.'

But the tax collector, standing far away, wouldn't even
lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, 'God, be
merciful to me, a sinner!'

I tell you, this man went down to
his house justified rather than the other; for everyone who exalts
himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted."

They were also bringing their babies to him, that he might
touch them. But when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.

Jesus summoned them, saying, "Allow the little children to come to me,
and don't hinder them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these.

Most assuredly, I tell you, whoever doesn't receive the Kingdom
of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it."

A certain ruler asked him, saying, "Good Teacher, what shall
I do to inherit eternal life?"

Jesus asked him, "Why do you call me good? No one is good,
except one -- God.

You know the commandments: 'Don't commit
adultery,' 'Don't murder,' 'Don't steal,' 'Don't give false testimony,'
'Honor your father and your mother.'"

He said, "I have observed all these things from my youth up."

When Jesus heard these things, he said to him, "You still
lack one thing. Sell all that you have, and distribute it to the poor.
You will have treasure in heaven. Come, follow me."

But when he heard these things, he became very sad, for he
was very rich.

Jesus, seeing that he became very sad, said, "How hard it is
for those who have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!

For
it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's eye, than for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God."

Those who heard it said, "Then who can be saved?"

But he said, "The things which are impossible with men are
possible with God."

Peter said, "Look, we have left everything, and followed
you."

He said to them, "Most assuredly I tell you, there is no one
who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for
the Kingdom of God's sake,

who will not receive many times more
in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life."

He took the twelve aside, and said to them, "Behold, we are
going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the
prophets concerning the Son of Man will be completed.

For he
will be delivered up to the Gentiles, will be mocked, treated
shamefully, and spit on.

They will scourge and kill him. On the
third day, he will rise again."

They understood none of these things. This saying was hidden
from them, and they didn't understand the things that were said.

It happened, as he came near Jericho, a certain blind man sat
by the road, begging.

Hearing a multitude going by, he asked
what this meant.

They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was
passing by.

He cried out, "Jesus, you son of David, have mercy
on me!"

Those who led the way rebuked him, that he should be
quiet; but he cried out all the more, "You son of David, have mercy on
me!"

Standing still, Jesus commanded him to be brought to him.
When he had come near, he asked him,

"What do you want me to
do?"

 He said, "Lord, that I may see again."

Jesus said to him, "Receive your sight. Your faith has
healed you."

Immediately he received his sight, and followed him,
glorifying God. All the people, when they saw it, praised God.

He entered and was passing through Jericho.

There was
a man named Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.

He was trying to see who Jesus was, and couldn't because of the
crowd, because he was short.

He ran on ahead, and climbed up
into a sycamore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way.

When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said to
him, "Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for today I must stay at your
house."

He hurried, came down, and received him joyfully.

When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, "He has gone in to lodge
with a man who is a sinner."

Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, "Behold, Lord, half of
my goods I give to the poor. If I have wrongfully exacted anything of
anyone, I restore four times as much."

Jesus said to him, "Today, salvation has come to this house,
because he also is a son of Abraham.

For the Son of Man came to
seek and to save that which was lost."

As they heard these things, he went on and told a parable,
because he was near Jerusalem, and they supposed that the Kingdom of
God would be revealed immediately.

He said therefore, "A
certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return.

He called ten servants of his, and gave
them ten minas, and told them, 'Conduct business until I come.'

But his citizens hated him, and sent an envoy after him, saying, 'We
don't want this man to reign over us.'

"It happened when he had come back again, having received
the kingdom, that he commanded these servants, to whom he had given the
money, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by
conducting business.

The first came before him, saying, 'Lord,
your mina has made ten more minas.'

"He said to him, 'Well done, you good servant! Because you
were found faithful in a very little, you shall have authority over ten
cities.'

"The second came, saying, 'Your mina, Lord, has made five
minas.'

"So he said to him, 'And you are to be over five cities.'

Another came, saying, 'Lord, behold, your mina, which I kept
laid away in a handkerchief,

for I feared you, because you are
an exacting man. You take up that which you didn't lay down, and reap
that which you didn't sow.'

"He said to him, 'Out of your own mouth will I judge you,
you wicked servant! You knew that I am an exacting man, taking up that
which I didn't lay down, and reaping that which I didn't sow.

Then why didn't you deposit my money in the bank, and at my coming, I
might have earned interest on it?'

He said to those who stood
by, 'Take the mina away from him, and give it to him who has the ten
minas.'

"They said to him, 'Lord, he has ten minas!'

'For I
tell you that to everyone who has, will more be given; but from him who
doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away from him.

But bring those enemies of mine who didn't want me to reign
over them here, and kill them before me.'"

Having said these
things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.

It happened, when he drew near to Bethsphage and Bethany, at
the mountain that is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,

saying, "Go your way into the village on the other side, in
which, as you enter, you will find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet
sat. Untie it, and bring it.

If anyone asks you, 'Why are you
untying it?' say to him: 'The Lord needs it.'"

Those who were sent went away, and found things just as he
had told them.

As they were untying the colt, the owners of it
said to them, 'Why are you untying the colt?'

They said, 'The
Lord needs it.'

They brought it to Jesus. They threw their
cloaks on the colt, and set Jesus on them.

As he went, they
spread their cloaks in the way.

As he was now getting near, at
the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the
disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the
mighty works which they had seen,

saying, "Blessed is the King
who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the
highest!"

Some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him,
"Teacher, rebuke your disciples!"

He answered them, "I tell you that if these were silent, the
stones would cry out."

When he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it,

saying, "If you, even you, had known today the things which belong to
your peace! But now, they are hidden from your eyes.

For the
days will come on you, when your enemies will throw up a barricade
against you, surround you, hem you in on every side,

and will
dash you and your children within you to the ground. They will not
leave in you one stone on another, because you didn't know the time of
your visitation."

He entered into the temple, and began to drive out those who
bought and sold in it,

saying to them, "It is written, 'My
house is a house of prayer,' but you have made it a 'den of robbers'!"

He was teaching daily in the temple, but the chief priests
and the scribes and the leading men among the people sought to destroy
him.

They couldn't find what they might do, for all the people
hung on to every word that he said.

It happened on one of those days, as he was teaching the
people in the temple and preaching the gospel, that the chief priests
and scribes came to him with the elders.

They asked him, "Tell
us: by what authority do you do these things? Or who is giving you this
authority?"

He answered them, "I also will ask you one question. Tell me:

the baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?"

They reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we say, 'From
heaven,' he will say, 'Why didn't you believe him?'

But if we
say, 'From men,' all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded
that John was a prophet."

They answered that they didn't know
where it was from.

Jesus said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what
authority I do these things."

He began to tell the people this parable. "A man planted a
vineyard, and rented it out to some farmers, and went into another
country for a long time.

At the proper season, he sent a
servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the
vineyard. But the farmers beat him, and sent him away empty.

He
sent yet another servant, and they also beat him, and treated him
shamefully, and sent him away empty.

He sent yet a third, and
they also wounded him, and threw him out.

The lord of the
vineyard said, 'What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. It may be
that seeing him, they will respect him.'

"But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned among
themselves, saying, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours.'

They threw him out of the vineyard,
and killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to
them?

He will come and destroy these farmers, and will give the
vineyard to others."

 When they heard it, they said, "May it never be!"

But he looked at them, and said, "Then what is this that is
written,
'The stone which the builders rejected,
 The same was made the chief cornerstone?'

"Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces,
 But it will crush whomever it falls on to dust."

The chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on Him
that very hour, but they feared the people -- for they knew He had
spoken this parable against them.

They watched him, and sent
out spies, who pretended to be righteous, that they might trap him in
something he said, so as to deliver him up to the power and authority
of the governor.

They asked him, "Teacher, we know that you say
and teach what is right, and aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach
the way of God.

Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or
not?"

But he perceived their craftiness, and said to them, "Why do
you test me?

Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription
are on it?"

 They answered, "Caesar's."

He said to them, "Then give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

They weren't able to trap him in his words before the
people. They marveled at his answer, and were silent.

Some of
the Sadducees came to him, those who deny that there is a resurrection.

They asked him, "Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man's
brother dies having a wife, and he is childless, his brother should
take the wife, and raise up children for his brother.

There
were therefore seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died
childless.

The second took her as wife, and he died childless.

The third took her, and likewise the seven all left no
children, and died.

Afterward the woman also died.

Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them will she be? For the
seven had her as a wife."

Jesus said to them, "The sons of this age marry, and are
given in marriage.

But those who are considered worthy to
attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry,
nor are given in marriage.

For they can't die any more, for
they are like the angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the
resurrection.

But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed
at the bush, when he called the Lord 'The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.'

Now he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living, for all are alive to him."

Some of the scribes answered, "Teacher, you speak well."

They didn't dare to ask him any more questions.

He said to them, "Why do they say that the Christ is David's
son?

David himself says in the book of Psalms,
'The Lord said to my Lord,
 "Sit at my right hand,

Until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet."'

"David therefore calls him Lord, so how is he his son?"

In the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples,

"Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and
love greetings in the marketplaces, the best seats in the synagogues,
and the best places at feasts;

who devour widows' houses, and
for a pretense make long prayers: these will receive greater
condemnation."

He looked up, and saw the rich people who were putting their
gifts into the treasury.

He saw a certain poor widow casting in
two lepta.

He said, "Truly I tell you, this poor widow put in
more than all of them,

for all these put in gifts for God from
their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, put in all that she had
to live on."

As some were talking about the temple and how it was
decorated with beautiful stones and gifts, he said,

"As for
these things which you see, the days will come, in which there will not
be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down."

They asked him, "Teacher, so when will these things be? What
is the sign that these things are about to happen?"

He said, "Watch out that you don't get led astray, for many
will come in my name, saying, 'I AM,' and, 'The time is at hand.'
Therefore don't follow them.

When you hear of wars and
disturbances, don't be terrified, for these things must happen first,
but the end won't come immediately."

Then he said to them, "Nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom.

There will be great earthquakes,
famines, and plagues in various places. There will be terrors and great
signs from heaven.

But before all these things, they will lay
their hands on you and will persecute you, delivering you up to
synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for my
name's sake.

It will turn out as a testimony for you.

Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate beforehand how to
answer,

for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your
adversaries will not be able to withstand or to contradict.

You
will be handed over even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends.
Some of you they will cause to be put to death.

You will be
hated by all men for my name's sake.

Not a hair of your head
will perish.

By your endurance you will win your lives.

"But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know
that its desolation is at hand.

Then let those who are in Judea
flee to the mountains. Let those who are in the midst of her depart.
Let those who are in the country not enter therein.

For these
are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled.

Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse
infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land,
and wrath to this people.

They will fall by the edge of the
sword, and will be led captive into all the nations. Jerusalem will be
trampled down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are
fulfilled.

There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and
on the earth anxiety of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the
sea and the waves;

men fainting for fear, and for expectation
of the things which are coming on the world: for the powers of the
heavens will be shaken.

Then they will see the Son of Man
coming in a cloud with power and great glory.

But when these
things begin to happen, look up, and lift up your heads, because your
redemption is near."

He told them a parable. "See the fig tree, and all the
trees.

When they are already budding, you see it and know by
your own selves that the summer is already near.

Even so you
also, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God
is near.

Most assuredly I tell you, this generation will not
pass away until all things are accomplished.

Heaven and earth
will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.

"So be careful, or your hearts will be loaded down with
carousing, drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day will come
on you suddenly.

For it will come like a snare on all those who
dwell on the surface of all the earth.

Therefore be watchful
all the time, asking that you may be counted worthy to escape all these
things that will happen, and to stand before the Son of Man."

Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every night
he would go out, and spent the night on the mountain that is called
Olivet.

All the people came early in the morning to him in the
temple to hear him.

Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the
Passover, drew near.

The chief priests and the scribes sought
how they might put him to death, for they feared the people.

Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, who was numbered
with the twelve.

He went away, and talked with the chief priests
and captains about how he might deliver him to them.

They were
glad, and agreed to give him money.

He consented, and sought an
opportunity to deliver him to them in the absence of the multitude.

The day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover must be
sacrificed.

He sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and prepare the
Passover for us, that we may eat."

They said to him, "Where do you want us to prepare?"

He said to them, "Behold, when you have entered into the
city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him into
the house which he enters.

Tell the master of the house, 'The
Teacher says to you, "Where is the guest room, where I may eat the
Passover with my disciples?"'

He will show you a large,
furnished upper room. Make preparations there."

They went, found things as he had told them, and they
prepared the Passover.

When the hour had come, he sat down with
the twelve apostles.

He said to them, "I have earnestly desired
to eat this Passover with you before I suffer,

for I tell you,
I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in the
Kingdom of God."

He received a cup, and when he had given
thanks, he said, "Take this, and share it among yourselves,

for
I tell you, I will not drink at all again from the fruit of the vine,
until the Kingdom of God comes."

He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it,
and gave to them, saying, "This is my body which is given for you. Do
this in memory of me."

Likewise, he took the cup after supper,
saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out
for you.

But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me
on the table.

The Son of Man indeed goes, as it has been
determined, but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!"

They began to question among themselves, which of them it
was who would do this thing.

There arose also a contention
among them, which of them was considered to be greatest.

He
said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those
who have authority over them are called 'benefactors.'

But not
so with you. But one who is the greater among you, let him become as
the younger, and one who is governing, as one who serves.

For
who is greater, one who sits at the table, or one who serves? Isn't it
he who sits at the table? But I am in the midst of you as one who
serves.

But you are those who have continued with me in my
trials.

I confer on you a kingdom, even as my Father conferred
on me,

that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom.
You will sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."

The Lord said, "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have
you, that he might sift you as wheat,

but I prayed for you,
that your faith wouldn't fail. You, when once you have turned again,
establish your brothers."

He said to him, "Lord, I am ready to go with you both to
prison and to death!"

He said, "I tell you, Peter, the rooster will by no means
crow today until you deny that you know me three times."

He said to them, "When I sent you out without purse, and
wallet, and shoes, did you lack anything?"

 They said, "Nothing."

Then he said to them, "But now, whoever has a purse, let him
take it, and likewise a wallet. Whoever has none, let him sell his
cloak, and buy a sword.

For I tell you that this which is
written must still be fulfilled in me: 'He was counted with the
lawless.' For that which concerns me has an end."

They said, "Lord, behold, here are two swords."

 He said to them, "That is enough."

He came out, and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of
Olives. His disciples also followed him.

When he was at the
place, he said to them, "Pray that you don't enter into temptation."

He was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and he
knelt down and prayed,

saying, "Father, if you are willing,
remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done."

An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.

Being in agony he prayed more earnestly. His sweat became like
great drops of blood falling down on the ground.

When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the disciples,
and found them sleeping because of grief,

and said to them,
"Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter into
temptation."

While he was still speaking, behold, a multitude, and he who
was called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He came near to
Jesus to kiss him.

But Jesus said to him, "Judas, do you betray
the Son of Man with a kiss?"

When those who were around him saw what was about to happen,
they said to him, "Lord, shall we strike with the sword?"

A
certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off
his right ear.

But Jesus answered, "Let me at least do this" -- and he
touched his ear, and healed him.

Jesus said to the chief
priests, captains of the temple, and elders, who had come against him,
"Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?

When I was with you in the temple daily, you didn't stretch out your
hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness."

They seized him, and led him away, and brought him into the
high priest's house. But Peter followed from a distance.

When
they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard, and had sat
down together, Peter sat among them.

A certain servant girl saw
him as he sat in the light, and looking intently at him, said, "This
man also was with him."

He denied Jesus, saying, "Woman, I don't know him."

After a little while someone else saw him, and said, "You
also are one of them!"

 But Peter answered, "Man, I am not!"

After about one hour passed, another confidently affirmed,
saying, "Truly this man also was with him, for he is a Galilean!"

But Peter said, "Man, I don't know what you are talking
about!" Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.

The Lord turned, and looked at Peter. Then Peter remembered the
Lord's word, how he said to him, "Before the rooster crows you will
deny me three times."

He went out, and wept bitterly.

The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him.

Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face and asked him,
"Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?"

They spoke many
other things against him, insulting him.

As soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the
people was gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they
led him away into their council, saying,

"If you are the
Christ, tell us."

 But he said to them, "If I tell you, you won't believe,

and
if I ask, you will in no way answer me or let me go.

From now
on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of
God."

They all said, "Are you then the Son of God?"

 He said to them, "You say it, because I AM."

They said, "Why do we need any more witness? For we
ourselves have heard from his own mouth!"

The whole company of them rose up and brought him before
Pilate.

They began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man
perverting the nation, forbidding paying taxes to Caesar, and saying
that he himself is Christ, a king."

Pilate asked him, "Are you the King of the Jews?"

 He answered him, "So you say."

Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, "I find
no basis for a charge against this man."

But they insisted, saying, "He stirs up the people, teaching
throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this place."

But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the man was
a Galilean.

When he found out that he was in Herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem during
those days.

Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he had
wanted to see him for a long time, because he had heard many things
about him. He hoped to see some miracle done by him.

He
questioned him with many words, but he gave no answers.

The
chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing him.

Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him. Dressing him in
luxurious clothing, they sent him back to Pilate.

Herod and
Pilate became friends with each other that very day, for before that
they were enemies with each other.

Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and
the people,

and said to them, "You brought this man to me as
one that perverts the people, and see, I have examined him before you,
and found no basis for a charge against this man concerning those
things of which you accuse him.

Neither has Herod, for I sent
you to him, and see, nothing worthy of death has been done by him.

I will therefore chastise him and release him."

Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the feast.

But they all cried out together, saying, "Away with this man!
Release to us Barabbas!" --

one who was thrown into prison for
a certain revolt in the city, and for murder.

Then Pilate spoke to them again, wanting to release Jesus,

but they shouted, saying, "Crucify! Crucify him!"

He said to them the third time, "Why? What evil has this man
done? I have found no capital crime in him. I will therefore chastise
him and release him."

But they were urgent with loud voices,
asking that he might be crucified. Their voices and the voices of the
chief priests prevailed.

Pilate decreed that what they asked
for should be done.

He released him who had been thrown into
prison for insurrection and murder, for whom they asked, but he
delivered Jesus up to their will.

When they led him away, they grabbed one Simon of Cyrene,
coming from the country, and laid on him the cross, to carry it after
Jesus.

A great multitude of the people followed him, including
women who also mourned and lamented him.

But Jesus, turning to
them, said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep for me, but weep for
yourselves and for your children.

For behold, the days are
coming in which they will say, 'Blessed are the barren, the wombs that
never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.'

Then they will
begin to tell the mountains, 'Fall on us!' and to the hills, 'Cover
us.'

For if they do these things in the green tree, what will
be done in the dry?"

There were also others, two criminals, led with him to be
put to death.

When they came to the place that is called The
Skull, they crucified him there with the criminals, one on the right
and the other on the left.

Jesus said, "Father, forgive them, for they don't know what
they are doing."

 Dividing his garments among them, they cast lots.

The people
stood watching. The rulers with them also scoffed at him, saying, "He
saved others. Let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God, his
chosen one!"

The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him
vinegar,

and saying, "If you are the King of the Jews, save
yourself!"

An inscription was also written over him in letters of
Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: "THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS."

One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him, saying,
"If you are the Christ, save yourself and us!"

But the other answered, and rebuking him said, "Don't you
even fear God, seeing you are under the same condemnation?

And
we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward for our deeds, but this
man has done nothing wrong."

He said to Jesus, "Lord, remember
me when you come into your kingdom."

Jesus said to him, "Assuredly I tell you, today you will be
with me in Paradise."

It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the
whole land until the ninth hour.

The sun was darkened, and the
veil of the temple was torn in two.

Jesus, crying with a loud
voice, said, "Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!" Having said
this, he breathed his last.

When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God,
saying, "Certainly this was a righteous man."

All the
multitudes that came together to see this, when they saw the things
that were done, returned home beating their breasts.

All his
acquaintances, and the women who followed with him from Galilee, stood
at a distance, watching these things.

Behold, a man named Joseph, who was a member of the council,
a good and righteous man

(he had not consented to their counsel
and deed), from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was also waiting
for the Kingdom of God:

this man went to Pilate, and asked for
Jesus' body.

He took it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth,
and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone, where no one had ever
been laid.

It was the day of the Preparation, and the Sabbath
was drawing near.

The women, who had come with him out of
Galilee, followed after, and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid.

They returned, and prepared spices and ointments. On the
Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.

But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they and
some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had
prepared.

They found the stone rolled away from the tomb.

They entered in, and didn't find the Lord Jesus' body.

It
happened, while they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two men
stood by them in dazzling clothing.

Becoming terrified, they
bowed their faces down to the earth.

 They said to them, "Why do you seek the living among the dead?

He isn't here, but is risen. Remember what he told you when he
was still in Galilee,

saying that the Son of Man must be
delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the
third day rise again?"

They remembered his words,

returned from the tomb, and
told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.

Now
they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James. The
other women with them told these things to the apostles.

These
words seemed to them to be nonsense, and they didn't believe them.

But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. Stooping and looking in,
he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he departed to his
home, wondering what had happened.

Behold, two of them were going that very day to a village
named Emmaus, which was sixty stadia from Jerusalem.

They
talked with each other about all of these things which had happened.

It happened, while they talked and questioned together, that
Jesus himself came near, and went with them.

But their eyes
were kept from recognizing him.

He said to them, "What are you
talking about as you walk, and are sad?"

One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, "Are you the only
stranger in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things which have happened
there in these days?"

He said to them, "What things?"

 They said to him, "The things concerning Jesus, the Nazarene, who
was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people;

and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be
condemned to death, and crucified him.

But we were hoping that
it was he who would redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it is now
the third day since these things happened.

Also, certain women
of our company amazed us, having arrived early at the tomb;

and
when they didn't find his body, they came saying that they had also
seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.

Some of us
went to the tomb, and found it just like the women had said, but they
didn't see him."

He said to them, "Foolish men, and slow of heart to believe
in all that the prophets have spoken!

Didn't the Christ have to
suffer these things and to enter into his glory?"

Beginning
from Moses and from all the prophets, he explained to them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.

They drew near to the
village, where they were going, and he acted like he would go further.

They urged him, saying, "Stay with us, for it is almost
evening, and the day is almost over."

 He went in to stay with them.

It happened, that when he had
sat down at the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks.
Breaking it, he gave to them.

Their eyes were opened, and they
recognized him, and he vanished out of their sight.

They said
one to another, "Weren't our hearts burning within us, while he spoke
to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to us?"

Rising rose up that very hour, they returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and those who were with them,

saying, "The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon!"

They related the things that happened along the way, and how he was
recognized by them in the breaking of the bread.

As they said these things, Jesus himself stood among them,
and said to them, "Peace be to you."

But they were terrified and filled with fear, and supposed
that they had seen a spirit.

He said to them, "Why are you troubled? Why do doubts arise
in your hearts?

See my hands and my feet, that it is truly me.
Touch me and see, for a spirit doesn't have flesh and bones, as you see
that I have."

When he had said this, he showed them his hands
and his feet.

While they still didn't believe for joy, and
wondered, he said to them, "Do you have anything here to eat?"

They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some honeycomb.

He took it, and ate in front of them.

He said to them,
"This is what I told you, while I was still with you, that all things
which are written in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms,
concerning me must be fulfilled."

Then he opened their minds, that they might understand the
Scriptures.

He said to them, "Thus it is written, and thus it
was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the
third day,

and that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

You are witnesses of these things.

Behold, I send forth
the promise of my Father on you. But wait in the city of Jerusalem
until you are clothed with power from on high."

He led them out as far as Bethany, and he lifted up his
hands, and blessed them.

It happened, while he blessed them,
that he withdrew from them, and was carried up into heaven.

They worshiped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,

and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.