INTRODUCTION 
						 Again we have epideictic orations similar to the preceding and the
							following essays, and the conclusion again is abrupt, as if the speaker
							had been obliged to stop after a certain period of time had elapsed.
							Note, however, the very considerable difference in length between the
							first and the second part of the present work. 
						 We know nothing of the circumstances under which these orations were
							delivered, but it is quite possible that they were spoken at Rome to
							show the Romans what an educated Greek could do in the treatment of a
							controversial subject. 
						 The first oration deals mainly with the manner in which Fortune used
							Alexander; but much is also said of the manner in which he met the
							buffetings of Fortune and rose superior to them. In the second oration
							Fortune is by no means neglected, but rather more is said of Alexander's
							Virtue; thus it is not surprising to find in Lamprias's list of
							Plutarch's works two entries: the first, No. 176, Alexander's Fortune ( Περὶ τῆς
								Ἀλεξάνδρου τύχης ) and the second, No. 186, Alexander's Virtue ( Περὶ τῆς Ἀλεξάνδρου άρετῆς ). 
						 Much that is included here is found also in Plutarch's Life of Alexander , in Arrian's Anabasis , and in other writers cited in the
							notes. 
						 
						 The genuineness of the tradition which ascribes these works to Plutarch
							(for the attribution had been attacked by A. Schäfer and by L. Weber)
							has been brilliantly vindicated by W. Nachstädt in his dissertation,
								 De Plutarchi Declamationibus
								quae sunt De Alexandri Fortuna (Berliner Beiträge für klassischen
								Philologie , ii.), Karl Vogt, Berlin, 1895. This excellent
							work also contains a discussion of many of the problems which confront
							the editor of these essays and has been of great service.

This is Fortune's discourse, who declares that Alexander is her own
							characteristic handiwork, and hers alone. But some rejoinder must be
							made on behalf of philosophy, or rather on Alexander's behalf, who would
							be vexed and indignant if he should be thought to have received as a
							pure gift, even at the hands of Fortune, the supremacy which he won at
							the price of much blood and of wounds that followed one after another;
							and 
								 Many a night did he spend without sleeping, 
								 Many a blood-stained day did he pass amid combats unceasing, 
								 
							 against irresistible forces and innumerable tribes, against
							impassable rivers and mountain fastnesses whose summit no arrow could
							reach, furthered by wise counsels, steadfast purpose, manly courage, and
							a prudent heart.

I think that if Fortune should try to inscribe her name on his successes,
							he would say to her, Slander not my virtues, nor
								take away my fair fame by detraction. Darius was your handiwork: he
								who was a slave and courier of the
									king, him did
								you make the mighty lord of Persia; and Sardar Lapalus, upon whose
								head you placed the royal diadem, though he spent his days in
								carding purple wool. But I, through my
								victory at Arbela, went up to Susa, and
									Cilicia opened the way for me into the
								broad land of Egypt; but to Cilicia I came by way of the
									Granicus, which I crossed, using as a bridge the dead bodies
								of Mithridates and Spithridates. Adorn yourself, proud Fortune, and
								vaunt your dominion over kings that never felt a wound nor shed a
								drop of blood. For they have been Fortune's favourites, men such as
									Ochus was and Artaxerses, whom
								at the very hour of their birth you placed upon the throne of Cyrus.
								But my body bears many a token of an opposing Fortune and no ally of
								mine. First, among the Illyrians, my head was wounded
								by a stone and my neck by a cudgel. Then at the Granicus my head was cut open by an enemy's dagger, at
									Issus my thigh was
								pierced by the sword. Next at Gaza my ankle
								was wounded by an arrow, my shoulder was dislocated, and I whirled
								heavily round and round. Then at Maracandaf the
								bone of my leg was split open by an arrow. There awaited me towards
								the last also the buffetings I received among the Indians and the
									 violence of famines. Among the
									Aspasians my shoulder was wounded by an arrow, and among
								the Gandridae my leg. Among the
									Mallians, the shaft of an
								arrow sank deep into my breast and buried its steel; and I was
								struck in the neck by a cudgel, when the scaling-ladders which we
								had moved up to the walls were battered down; and Fortune cooped me
								up alone, favouring ignoble barbarians and not illustrious
								adversaries with such an exploit. But if Ptolemy had not held
								his shield above me, and Limnaeus taking
								his stand before me had not fallen, a target for ten thousand
								shafts, and if my Macedonians had not overthrown the wall with
								spirit and main force, then that nameless village in a foreign land
								must needs have become the tomb of Alexander.

Moreover, there were the trials of the campaign itself: storms,
							droughts, deep rivers, the heights of the Birdless Rock, the monstrous shapes of savage beasts, an
							uncivilized manner of life, the constant succession of petty kings and
							their repeated treachery. Then there were also the difficulties before
							his expedition: Greece was still
							gasping over Philip's wars; Thebes, staggering to her feet after her
							fall, was shaking the dust of Chaeroneia from her arms, and Athens was
							stretching forth a helping hand to join with Thebes. All Macedonia was
							festering with revolt and looking toward Amyntas and the children of Aëropus ; the Illyrians were again rebelling, and trouble with
							the Scythians was impending for their Macedonian neighbours, who were in
							the throes of political change; Persian gold flowed freely through the
							hands of the popular leaders everywhere, and helped to rouse the
							Peloponnesus; Philip's treasuries were bare of money, and in addition
							there was owing a loan of two hundred talents (as
							Onesicritus records). In such poverty and in circumstances fraught with such
							uncertainty, a stripling, scarcely older than a boy, had the daring to
							hope for Babylon and Susa; nay more, to conceive the project of
							dominion over all the world, relying only on the thirty thousand foot
							and four thousand cavalry which were his; for, according to
							Aristobulus, that was the full extent of their number. But King Ptolemy
							puts them at thirty thousand foot and five thousand horse, Anaximenes at
							forty-three thousand foot, fifty-five hundred horse. And the great and
							glorious war-chest which Fortune had ready for him was only seventy
								talents, as Aristobulus says, though Duris says
							it was provision for only thirty days.

Was, then, Alexander ill-advised and precipitate in setting forth with
							such humble resources to acquire so vast an empire? By no means. For who
							has ever put forth with greater or fairer equipment than he: greatness
							of soul, keen intelligence, selfrestraint, and manly courage, with which
							Philosophy herself provided him for his
							campaign? Yes, the equipment that he had from Aristotle his teacher when
							he crossed over into Asia was more than what he had from his father
							Philip. But although we believe those who record that Alexander once
							said that the Iliad 
							 and the Odyssey accompanied
							him as equipment for his campaigns, since we hold Homer in reverence,
							yet are we to contemn anyone who asserts that the works of Homer
							accompanied him as a consolation after toil and as a pastime for sweet
							hours of leisure, but that his true equipment was philosophic teaching,
							and treatises on Fearlessness and Courage, and Self-restraint also, and
							Greatness of Soul? For of course it is obvious that Alexander wrote
							nothing on the subject of either syllogisms or axioms, nor did he have
							the opportunity of sharing the walks in the Lyceum, or of discussing
							propositions in the Academy. For it is by these criteria that those
							define philosophy who regard it as a theoretical rather than a practical
							pursuit. And yet even Pythagoras wrote nothing at all, nor did Socrates,
							nor Arcesilaus, nor Carneades, who were all most notable among
							philosophers. Nor were these philosophers continuously occupied with
							such tremendous wars, nor with spreading civilization among foreign
							princes, nor in establishing Grecian cities among savage nations, nor
							did they go on and on, instructing lawless and ignorant tribes in the
							principles of law and peace; but, even though they had leisure, they
							relinquished the writing of philosophy to sophists. Whence, then, comes
							our belief that they were true philosophers? Surely from what they said,
							or from the manner of life which they led, or
							from the principles which they taught. By these criteria let Alexander
							also be judged! For from his words, from his deeds, and from the
							instruction which he imparted, it will be seen that he was indeed a
							philosopher.

And first, if you will, consider a matter entirely contrary to the
							general belief, and compare Alexander's pupils with those of Plato and
							Socrates. Plato and Socrates taught pupils of splendid natural endowment
							who spoke the same language; so that, even if the pupils understood
							nothing else, at least they understood the Greek tongue. And even so,
							Plato and Socrates did not win over many. But their pupils, such as
							Critias and Alcibiades and Cleitophon, were prone to spew the good word
							forth, as a horse the curbing bit, and turned them to other ways. 
						 But if you examine the results of Alexander's instruction, you will see
							that he educated the Hyrcanians to respect the marriage bond,
							and taught the Arachosians to till the soil, and persuaded the Sogdians
							to support their parents, not to kill them, and the Persians to
							revere their mothers and not to take them in wedlock. O wondrous power
							of Philosophic Instruction, that brought the Indians to worship Greek
							gods, and the Scythians to bury their dead, not to devour them! We
							admire Carneades' power, which made Cleitomachus, formerly called Hasdrubal, and a
							Carthaginian by birth, adopt Greek ways. We admire the character of
							Zeno, which persuaded Diogenes the Babylonian to be a
							philosopher. But when Alexander was civilizing Asia, Homer was commonly
							read, and the children of the Persians, of the Susianians, and of the
							Gedrosians learned to chant, the tragedies of Sophocles and
								Euripides. And although
							Socrates, when tried on the charge of introducing foreign deities, lost his cause to the
							informers who infested Athens, yet through Alexander Bactria and the
							Caucasus learned to revere the gods of the Greeks. Plato wrote a book on
							the One Ideal Constitution, but because of its forbidding character he
							could not persuade anyone to adopt it; but Alexander established more
							than seventy cities among savage tribes, and sowed all Asia with Grecian
							magistracies, and thus overcame its uncivilized and brutish manner of
							living. Although few of us read Plato's Laws , yet hundreds of thousands have made use of
							Alexander's laws, and continue to use them. Those who were vanquished by
							Alexander are happier than those who escaped his hand; for these had no
							one to put an end to the wretchedness of their existence, while the
							victor compelled those others to lead a happy life. Therefore it is even
							more just to apply Themistocles' saying 
							to the nations conquered by Alexander. For, when Themistocles in exile
							had obtained great gifts from Artaxerxes, and had received three cities
							to pay him tribute, one to supply his bread, another his wine, and a
							third his meat, he exclaimed, My children, we
								should be ruined now, had we not been ruined before. Thus
							Alexander's new subjects would not have been civilized, had they not
							been vanquished; Egypt would not have its
							Alexandria, nor Mesopotamia its Seleuceia, nor Sogdiana its Prophthasia,
							nor India its Bucephalia, nor the Caucasus a Greek city hard by; for by
							the founding of cities in these places savagery was extinguished and the
							worse element, gaining familiarity with the better, changed under its
							influence. If, then, philosophers take the greatest pride in civilizing
							and rendering adaptable the intractable and untutored elements in human
							character, and if Alexander has been shown to have changed the savage
							natures of countless tribes, it is with good reason that he should be
							regarded as a very great philosopher.

Moreover, the much-admired Republic 
							 of Zeno, the
							founder of the Stoic sect, may be summed up in this one main principle:
							that all the inhabitants of this world of ours should not live
							differentiated by their respective rules of justice into separate cities
							and communities, but that we should consider all men to be of one
							community and one polity, and that we should have a common life and an
							order common to us all, even as a herd that feeds together and shares
							the pasturage of a common field. This Zeno wrote, giving shape to a
							dream or, as it were, shadowy picture of a well-ordered and philosophic
							commonwealth; but it was Alexander who gave effect to the idea. For
							Alexander did not follow Aristotle's advice to treat
							the Greeks as if he were their leader, and other peoples as if he were
							their master; to have regard for the Greeks as for friends and kindred,
							but to conduct himself toward other peoples as
							though they were plants or animals; for to do so would have been to
							cumber his leadership with numerous battles and banishments and
							festering seditions. But, as he believed that he carne as a heaven-sent
							governor to all, and as a mediator for the whole world, those whom he
							could not persuade to unite with him, he conquered by force of arms, and
							he brought together into one body all men everywhere, uniting and mixing
							in one great loving-cup, as it were, men's lives, their characters,
							their marriages, their very habits of life. He bade them all
							consider as their fatherland the whole inhabited earth, as their
							stronghold and protection his camp, as akin to them all good men, and as
							foreigners only the wicked; they should not distinguish between Grecian
							and foreigner by Grecian cloak and targe, or scimitar and jacket; but
							the distinguishing mark of the Grecian should be seen in virtue, and
							that of the foreigner in iniquity; clothing and food, marriage and
							manner of life they should regard as common to all, being blended into
							one by ties of blood and children.

Now Demaratus the Corinthian, one of Philip's intimate friends, when he had seen
							Alexander in Susa, exclaimed with tears of joy that all the Greeks who had died before that hour
							had been deprived of a great joy, since they had not seen Alexander
							seated on the throne of Darius. But I swear that for my part I feel no
							envy because of this spectacle toward them that saw it, for it was but
							the handiwork of Fortune, and the lot of other
							kings as well. But methinks I would gladly have been a witness of that
							fair and holy marriage-rite, when he brought together in one
							golden-canopied tent an hundred Persian brides and an hundred Macedonian
							and Greek bridegrooms, united at a common hearth and board. He himself, crowned with garlands,
							was the first to raise the marriage hymn as though he were singing a
							song of truest friendship over the union of the two greatest and most
							mighty peoples; for he, of one maid the bridegroom, and at the same
							time of all the brides the escort, as a father and sponsor united them
							in the bonds of wedlock. Indeed at this sight I should have cried out
							for joy, O dullard Xerxes, stupid fool that spent
								so much fruitless toil to bridge the Hellespont! This is the way
								that wise kings join Asia with Europe; it is not by beams nor
								rafts, nor by lifeless and unfeeling bonds, but by the ties of
								lawful love and chaste nuptials and mutual joy in children that they
								join the nations together.

Considering carefully this order of affairs, Alexander did not favour the
							Median raiment, but preferred the Persian, for it was much more simple
							than the Median. Since he deprecated the unusual and theatrical
							varieties of foreign adornment, such as the tiara and the full-sleeved
							jacket and trousers, he wore a composite dress adapted from both Persian
							and Macedonian fashion, as Eratosthenes has recorded. As a philosopher what he wore was
								 a matter of indifference, but as sovereign
							of both nations and benevolent king he strove to acquire the goodwill of
							the conquered by showing respect for their apparel, so that they might
							continue constant in loving the Macedonians as rulers, and might not
							feel hate toward them as enemies. Conversely it were the mark of an
							unwise and vainglorious mind to admire greatly a cloak of uniform colour
							and to be displeased by a tunic with a purple border, or again to
							disdain those things and to be struck with admiration for these, holding
							stubbornly, in the manner of an unreasoning child, to the raiment in
							which the custom of his country, like a nurse, had attired him. When men
							hunt wild animals, they put on the skins of deer, and when they go to
							catch birds, they dress in tunics adorned with plumes and feathers; they
							are careful not to be seen by bulls when they have on red garments, nor
							by elephants when dressed in white; for these animals
							are provoked and made savage by the sight of these particular colours.
							But if a great king, in taming and mollifying headstrong and warring
							nations, just as in dealing with animals, succeeded in soothing and
							stilling them by wearing a garb familiar to them and by following their
							wonted manner of life, thereby conciliating their rough natures and
							smoothing their sullen brows, can men impeach him? Must they not rather
							wonder at his wisdom, since by but a slight alteration of his apparel he
							made himself the popular leader of all Asia, conquering their bodies by
							his arms, but winning over their souls by his apparel? And yet men
							marvel at the disciple of Socrates, Aristippus, that whether he wore a threadbare cloak
							or a fine Milesian robe he retained his gentility in either; but they
							impeach Alexander because, although paying due respect to his own
							national dress, he did not disdain that of his conquered subjects in
							establishing the beginnings of a vast empire. For he did not overrun
							Asia like a robber nor was he minded to tear and rend it, as if it were
							booty and plunder bestowed by unexpected good fortune, after the manner
							in which Hannibal later descended upon Italy, or as earlier the
								Treres descended upon Ionia and the Scythians upon Media. But Alexander desired to render all upon
							earth subject to one law of reason and one form of government and to
							reveal all men as one people, and to this purpose he made himself
							conform. But if the deity that sent down Alexander's soul into this
							world of ours had not recalled him quickly, one law would govern all
							mankind, and they all would look toward one rule of justice as though
							toward a common source of light. But as it is, that part of the world
							which has not looked upon Alexander has remained without sunlight.

Therefore, in the first place, the very plan and design of Alexander's
							expedition commends the man as a philosopher in his purpose not to win
							for himself luxury and extravagant living, but to win for all men
							concord and peace and community of interests. 
						 And, in the second place, let us examine his sayings too, since it is by
							their utterances that the souls of
							other kings and potentates also best reveal their characters. The elder
							Antigonus remarked to a certain sophist who put in his hands a treatise
							on justice, You are a
								fool to say anything about justice when you see me smiting other
								peoples cities. The despot Dionysius remarked that one should
							trick children with dice, but men with oaths. Upon the tomb of Sardanapalus 
							is written. These are still mine - what I ate,
								and my wanton love - frolics. Who would not own that by
							these several sayings are revealed Sardanapalus's love of pleasure,
							Dionysius's impiety, and Antigonus's injustice and greed? But if you
							subtract from Alexander's sayings his crown, his relationship with
							Ammon, and his noble birth, they will appear to you as the utterances of
							a Socrates or a Plato or a Pythagoras. Let us, then, pay no heed to the
							proud boasts which the poets inscribed upon his portraits and statues,
							studying, as they were, to portray, not Alexander's moderation, but his
							power: 
								 Eager to speak seems the statue of bronze, up to Zeus as 
								 it gazes: Earth I have set under foot; Zeus, keep Olympus
									yourself. 
								 
							 And another man makes Alexander say, I am
								the son of Zeus. 
							 These
							expressions, then, as I have said, the poets addressed to Alexander in
							flattery of his good fortune. 
						 But of the genuine sayings of Alexander we might first review those of
							his youth. Since he was the swiftest of foot of all the young men of his
								age, his comrades urged him to enter the Olympic games.
							He asked if the competitors were kings, and when his friends replied
							that they were not, he said that the contest was unfair, for it was one
							in which a victory would be over commoners, but a defeat would be the
							defeat of a king. 
						 When the thigh of his father Philip had been pierced by a spear in battle
							with the Triballians, and Philip, although he escaped with his life, was
							vexed with his lameness, Alexander said, Be of
								good cheer, father, and go on your way rejoicing, that at each step
								you may recall your valour. 
							 Are not these
							the words of a truly philosophic spirit which, because of its rapture
							for noble things, already revolts against mere physical encumbrances?
							How, then, think you, did he glory in his own wounds, remembering by
							each part of his body affected a nation overcome, a victory won, the
							capture of cities, the surrender of kings? He did not cover over nor
							hide his scars, but bore them with him openly as symbolic
							representations, graven on his body, of virtue and manly courage.

And in the same spirit if ever there chanced to be in hours of ease or at
							a banquet a comparison of the verses of Homer, each man choosing his
							favourite line, Alexander always judged this verse to be the greatest of
							all: Both things is he: both a goodly king and
								a warrior mighty. 
							 This praise, which at the time it was written another had
							received, Alexander conceived to be a law for himself, so that he said
							of Homer that in this same verse he had honoured the manly courage of
							Agamemnon and prophesied that of Alexander.
							Accordingly when he had crossed the Hellespont, he went to see the site
							of Troy, imagining to himself the heroic deeds enacted there; and
							when one of the natives of the country promised to give him the lyre of
							Paris, if he wished it, Alexander said, Of his
								lyre I have no need; for I already possess Achilles' lyre to the
								accompaniment of which, as he rested from his labours, he sang the famed deeds of heroes. 
								 But the lyre of Paris gave forth an altogether weak and
								womanish strain to accompany his love songs. Thus it is the mark
							of a truly philosophic soul to be in love with wisdom and to admire wise
							men most of all, and this was more characteristic of Alexander than of
							any other king. His attitude toward Aristotle has already been
								stated ; and it is recorded by several
							authors that he considered the musician Anaxarchus the most valuable of
							all his friends, that he gave ten thousand gold pieces to Pyrrhon of Elis the first time he met him, that he sent to
								Xenocrates, the friend of Plato, fifty
							talents as a gift, and that he made Onesicritus, the pupil of
							Diogenes the Cynic, chief pilot of his fleet. 
						 But when he came to talk with Diogenes g himself in Corinth, he was so
							awed and astounded with the life and the worth of the man that often,
							when remembrance of the philosopher came to him, he would say, If I were not
								Alexander,I should be Diogenes, that is to say: If I did not actively practise philosophy, I
								should apply myself to its theoretical pursuit. He did not say,
								 If I were not a king, I should be
								Diogenes, nor If I were not rich and an
								Argead ; for he did not rank Fortune above Wisdom, nor a crown
							and royal purple above the philosopher's wallet and threadbare gown. But
							he said, If I were not Alexander, I should be
								Diogenes ; that is to say: If it were not
								my purpose to combine foreign things with things Greek, to traverse
								and civilize every continent, to search out the uttermost parts of
								land and sea, to push the bounds of Macedonia to the farthest Ocean,
								and to disseminate and shower the blessings of Greek justice and
								peace over every nation, I should not be content to sit quietly in
								the luxury of idle power, but I should emulate the frugality of
								Diogenes. But as things are, forgive me, Diogenes, that I imitate
								Heracles, and emulate Perseus, and follow in the footsteps of
									Dionysus, the divine
								author and progenitor of my family, and desire that
								victorious Greeks should dance again in India and revive the memory
								of the Bacchic revels among the savage mountain tribes beyond the
								Caucasus. Even there it is said that there are certain holy men, a
								law unto themselves, who follow a rigid gymnosophy and give all
								their time to God; they are more frugal than Diogenes since they
								have no need of a wallet. For they do not store up food, since they
								have it ever fresh and green from the earth; the flowing rivers give
								them drink and they have fallen leaves and grassy earth to lie upon. Because of me even those
								faraway sages shall come to know of Diogenes, and he of them. And I
								also, like Diogenes, must alter the standard of coinage and stamp foreign states with the impress of Greek
								government.

Very well. Do Alexander's actions, then, reveal the caprice of Fortune,
							the violence of war, the might of conquest, or do they rather reveal the
							great courage and justice, the great restraint and mildness together
							with the decorous behaviour and intelligence, of one who did all things
							with sober and sane judgement? For, by Heaven, it is impossible for me
							to distinguish his several actions and say that this betokens his
							courage, this his humanity, this his selfcontrol, but everything he did
							seems the combined product of all the virtues; for he confirms the
							truth of that principle of the Stoics which declares that every act
							which the wise man performs is an activity in accord with every virtue;
							and although, as it appears, one particular virtue performs the chief
							role in every act, yet it but heartens on the other virtues and directs
							them toward the goal. Certainly one may observe that in Alexander the
							warlike is also humane, the mild also manly, the liberal provident, the
							irascible placable, the amatory temperate, his relaxation not idle, and
							his labours not without recreation. Who but he combined festivals with
							wars, campaigns with revels, Bacchic rites and weddings and nuptial
							songs with sieges and battle-fields? Who was ever more hostile to
							wrongdoers or kinder to the unfortunate? Who more stern to his opponents
							or more indulgent to petitioners? It occurs to
							me to introduce here an incident touching Porus. For
							when Porus was brought as a captive before Alexander, the conqueror
							asked how he should treat him. Like a king,
								Alexander, said Porus. When Alexander asked again if there were
							nothing else, No, said he, for everything is included in that word. And
							it naturally occurs to me also to exclaim over each of Alexander's
							deeds, Like a philosopher! For in this is
							included everything. He became enamoured of Roxanê, the daughter of Oxyartes, as she danced among the
							captive maidens; yet he did not offer any violence to her, but made her
							his wife. Like a philosopher! When he saw
								Darius pierced through
							by javelins, he did not offer sacrifice nor raise the paean of victory
							to indicate that the long war had come to an end; but he took off his
							own cloak and threw it over the corpse as though to conceal the divine
							retribution that waits upon the lot of kings. Like
								a philosopher! Once when he was reading a confidential letter
							from his mother, and Hephaestion, who,
							as it happened, was sitting beside him, was quite openly reading it too,
							Alexander did not stop him, but merely placed his own signet-ring on
							Hephaestion's lips, sealing them to silence with a friend's confidence.
								 Like a philosopher! For if these actions
							be not those of a philosopher, what others are?

But let us compare the actions of men who are admitted to be
							philosophers. Socrates forbore when Alcibiades 
							spent the night with him. But when 
								Philoxenus, the governor
							of the coast-lands of Asia Minor, wrote to Alexander that there was in
							Ionia a youth, the like of whom for bloom and beauty did not exist, and
							inquired in his letter whether he should send the boy on to him.
							Alexander wrote bitterly in reply, Vilest of men,
								what deed of this sort have you ever been privy to in my past that
								now you would flatter me with the offer of such pleasures? We
							admire Xenocrates because he would not accept the gift of
							fifty talents which Alexander sent him. But shall we not admire the
							giving of it? Or do we think that he who does not welcome a gift and he
							who bestows it are not at one in their contempt for money? Because of
							philosophy Xenocrates had no need of wealth and because of philosophy
							Alexander had need of wealth that he might lavish it upon such men. How
							many times has Alexander said this when forcing an attack amid a shower
							of missiles? And yet we
							believe that all men are endowed with the capacity to form right
							judgements. For Nature of herself is prone to lead men toward the Good.
							But philosophers differ from common persons in having their powers of
							judgement strong and firm to face danger, since the common man is not
							fortified by conceptions such as these: Best is
								one omen 
							 and 
							 Death is the end for all men ; but crises
							destroy all his calculations in the face of danger, and the fantastic
							imaginings of perils close at hand dispel his powers of judgement. For
							not only does fear, as Thucydides says, drive out memory, but it
							also drives out every purpose and ambition and impulse, unless
							philosophy has drawn her cords about them.

Yesterday we forgot, it seems, to remark that the age of Alexander had
							the good fortune to produce both many artistic achievements and many men
							of great talent. Perhaps, however, this was not part of Alexander's good
							fortune, but rather that of the artists, to have obtained as witness and
							spectator of their achievements the man who was both best able to judge
							of their success and to reward them most liberally. At any rate, it is
							said that, when Archestratus, a poet of a later age, who, though an
							accomplished writer, was passing his days in poverty and neglect,
							someone remarked to him, If you had been born in
								Alexander's time, for every verse he would have given you a Cyprus
								or a Phoenicia. And I think that the foremost of the artists of
							that age became so, not because they lived in Alexander's day, but
							through what Alexander did for them. For a good climate and a lightness
							of the surrounding air produces a bountiful harvest; and likewise the
							favour, esteem, and benignity shown by a king evokes a rich increase in
							the arts and in men of talent. And, conversely, through jealousy and parsimony or emulous rivalry on the part of
							monarchs all artistic production is quenched and perishes. 
						 Thus the despot Dionysius, as the story goes,
							while listening to a celebrated harper, engaged to give him a
								talent. Next day, when the man asked for the fulfilment of the
							promise, Dionysius said, Yesterday I was delighted
								with your performance, and during the time that you were singing I
								also delighted you with hopes! The result is that at that very time
								you were receiving full pay for the pleasure you gave by having your
								pleasure too! Alexander, the tyrant
							of Pherae (this last should be his only appellation; he should not be
							permitted to disgrace the name of Alexander), as he watched a tragic
							actor, felt himself much moved to pity through enjoyment of the acting.
							He jumped up, therefore, and left the theatre at a rapid pace,
							exclaiming that it would be a dreadful thing, if, when he was
							slaughtering so many citizens, he should be seen to weep over the
							sufferings of Hecuba and Polyxena. And he came near visiting punishment
							upon the actor because the man had softened his heart, as iron in the
							fire. 
						 Archelaüs was
							thought to be somewhat niggardly in his favours, and Timotheus liked to
							hint at this by often chanting this refrain: Over the earth-born silver you rave. But Archelaüs, with
							some wit, chanted in reply: That, however, is
								what you crave. 
							 
						 
						 Ateas, the Scythian king, took the flute-player Ismenias captive, and
							ordered him to play at a banquet. The rest were delighted, and
							applauded, but Ateas swore his horse's neighing was sweeter to his
								ear. So
							far from the Muses' habitation did he allow his ears to dwell, and his
							soul he kept in the mangers,better attuned to hear, not horses'
							neigh,but asses ' bray! At the court of monarchs such as these what
							advancement or esteem could there be for Art, or for Poetry and Music of
							excellence? Nor, again, could artistic endeavour flourish at the court
							of those who wish to be rival performers in these arts, and thus through
							malice and ill-will suppress the true artists. Such a prince was
							Dionysius (to use him again as an example), who threw the poet
								Philoxenus into the stone-quarries; for when
							Dionysius ordered him to correct a tragedy of his, Philoxenus cancelled
							the whole piece from the very beginning to the final flourish. 
						 
						 Philip also was in these matters somewhat more petty and childish than
							became him, since he had acquired his knowledge late in life. Thus they
							tell the tale that Philip once
							argued with a certain harp-player about the technique of his instrument,
							and even thought he was confuting the man; but the harp-player smiled
							gently and said, God forbid, your Majesty, that
								you should ever fall so low as to know more of these matters than
								I.

But Alexander, knowing well in what matters he should be merely a
							spectator and listener, and in what he should play the chief role,
							trained himself always to be formidable in
							arms, and. in the words of Aeschylus, 
							 Sturdy contender in arms, baleful to all that
								oppose. This art he inherited from his ancestors, the
							Aeacidae, and from Heracles ; but upon the other
							arts he freely bestowed honour without jealousy according to their worth
							and artistic excellence; but he was not so easily carried away by the
							pleasure they give him as to try to imitate them. The tragic actors of
							his time were the group that centred about Thettalus and
								Athenodorus. 
							At the contest of these two, the kings of Cyprus defrayed the expenses
							of the performance and Alexander's most celebrated generals served as
							judges. When Athenodorus won, I would rather, 
							said Alexander, have lost half my kingdom than see
								Thettalus defeated. However, he did not intercede with the
							judges nor find fault with the judgement, since he felt that, while he
							must be superior to all men, yet he must submit to Justice. 
						 The comic actors of his time were the group that centred about Lycon of
								Scarpheia. 
							When Lycon inserted in one of his comedies a begging verse, Alexander
							laughed and gave him ten talents. 
						 Various harp-players also were his friends, among them Aristonicus, who came to Alexander's aid
							in a certain battle, and was slain fighting gloriously. Therefore
							Alexander ordered to be made and set up at Delphi a bronze statue of
							him, with lyre in hand and spear advanced; thereby he not only honoured
								 this particular man, but also paid tribute
							to Music herself, in the belief that she is a creator of true men and,
							in particular, that she filis with inspiration and impetuousness those
							who are truly her fosterchildren. For once Upon a time, when Antigenides
							was playing on his flute the Chariot Song, Alexander became so transported, and his spirit so
							inflamed by the strains, that he leapt up and laid hands upon the
							weapons that lay near, and thus confirmed the testimony of the Spartans
							who used to sing, 
							 The noble playing of the lyre is meet to match
								the sword. 
						 
						 Apelles the painter and Lysippus the sculptor also lived in the time of
							Alexander. The former painted Alexander wielding
								the Thunderbolt 
							 so
							vividly and with so natural an expression, that men said that, of the
							two Alexanders, Alexander, son of Philip, was invincible, but the
							Alexander of Apelles was inimitable. And when Lysippus modelled his first
							statue of Alexander which represented him looking up with his face
							turned towards the heavens (as indeed Alexander often did look, with a
							slight inclination of his head to one side ),someone engraved these verses on the statue, not
							without some plausibility, 
								 Eager to speak seems the statue of bronze, up to Zeus as it gazes
									: 
								 Earth I have set under foot: Zeus, keep Olympus yourself! 
							 
							 Wherefore Alexander gave orders that
								Lysippus only should make statues of him. For Lysippus was, it
							seemed, the only one that revealed in the bronze Alexander's character
							and in moulding his form portrayed also his virtues. The others wished
							to imitate the flexing of his neck and the melting and liquid softness
							of his eyes, but were unable to preserve his virile and leonine
							expression. 
						 Among the other artists at his court was Stasicrates the master-sculptor, not seeking to
							make something flowery or pleasant or lifelike to look upon, but
							employing a magnificence in workmanship and design worthy of a king's
							munificence. He followed Alexander into Asia and found fault with the
							paintings, sculptures, and moulded likenesses that had been made of him,
							on the ground that they were the works of timid and ignoble artists. But I, your Majesty, said he, have conceived the project of placing your
								likeness in living and imperishable material, with roots that are
								everlasting and weight immovable and unshakable. For Mount Athos in
								Thrace, in that part where is its highest and most conspicuous
								summit, has well-proportioned surfaces and heights, limbs and joints
								and proportions that suggest the human form. When it has been
								properly carved and worked into shape, it can be called Alexander's
								statue, and Alexander's statue it will be; with its base set in the
								sea, in its left hand it will encompass and hold a city peopled with
								ten thousand inhabitants, and with its
								right pour from a bowl of libation an ever-flowing river down into
								the sea. But as for gold and bronze, ivory, wooden timbers, and
									dyes, which make those paltry images that can be
								bought and sold, stolen, or melted down, let us reject them all! 
							Alexander listened to his words and admired but declined with thanks the
							lofty designs and the boldness of the artist. But, said he, let Athos remain as it is. It is enough that it
							be the memorial of the arrogance of one king ; but my imprint the Caucasus shall show
							and the Emodian range
							and the Tanaïs and the Caspian Sea; these will be the image of my
							deeds.

But imagine, pray, that such a work had been completed and made evident
							to men's eyes. Is there anyone who could look upon it and suppose that
							the form, the arrangement, and the appearance were created by Fortune
							and Accident? No one, I think. What of Apelles' Wielder of the Thunderbolt ? 
							What of the statue which takes its name from the Spear? 
							Shall we admit, then, that greatness in a statue cannot, without the
							help of Art, be created by
							Fortune's profuse provision of gold and bronze and ivory and much rich
							material, but is it possible that a great man, or rather the greatest
							man of all that have ever lived, without the help of Virtue, was
							perfected through Fortunes supplying him with arms and money, foot and
							horse? But for him who has not learned how to use these things they are
							a danger, not a strength and enrichment, but a means of proving his
							weakness and pettiness. For Antisthenes was
							right when he said, 
							 We should pray that our enemies be provided with
								all good things, except courage; for thus these good things will
								belong, not to their owners, but to those that conquer them. 
							Therefore they say that Nature also for defence has caused horns,
							wonderful for their size and jagged points, to grow upon the deer, the
							most cowardly of all animals; and therein does Nature teach us that
							strength and arms are of no benefit to such as have not the courage to
							stand their ground. Thus also Fortune, by frequently bestowing on
							cowards and fools military forces and dominions, in which they disgrace
							themselves, emblazons and commends Virtue as the one quality that
							constitutes the greatness and beauty of man. For if indeed, as
								Epicharmus says, Mind has sight
								and Mind has hearing; but All
								things else are deaf and blind; then it happens that these
							are really lacking in reason. For our perceptive faculties seem to
							respond to their own special stimuli; but the fact that it is mind which
							aids us and mind which emblazons our deeds, and it is mind that conquers
							and overpowers and plays the monarch, and that all
								things else, since they are blind and
								deaf and soulless, mislead and burden and disgrace their
							possessors, if Virtue be not present, is a truth which may be
							gleaned from history. 
						 Now of the two monarchs Semiramis and Sardanapalus, in whose hands were
							placed the same power and dominion,
								Semiramis, though a woman, equipped great expeditions, armed her
							ranks, established the Babylonian Empire, and sailed about the Persian
							Gulf subduing the Ethiopians and Arabs. But Sardanapalus, though
							born a man, spent his days at home carding purple wool, sitting with his
							knees drawn up in front of him among his concubines; and when he died,
							they made a stone statue of him dancing in a barbaric fashion and
							apparently snapping its fingers above its head. They engraved upon it:
								 Eat, drink, and sport with love; all else is
								naught. 
							 
						 
						 When Crates saw a golden statue of Phrynê the
							courtesan standing at Delphi, he cried out that it stood there as a
							monument to Greek licentiousness; and thus if one examine either the
							life or the tomb of Sardanapalus (for I think there is no difference
							between them), one would say that they are a monument to the bounty of
							Fortune. But if this be so, shall we allow Fortune to lay hold upon
							Alexander after Sardanapalus, and to lay claim to Alexander's greatness
							and power? For what greater gift did she bestow on him than those which
							other monarchs received at her hands: arms, horses, missiles, money,
							guardsmen? Let Fortune endeavour to make an Aridaeus great by these, if she can, or an Ochus
							or Oarses or Tigranes the Armenian, or the
							Bithynian Nicomedes. Of these Tigranes cast down his
							crown before the feet of Pompey and ignominiously received back his
							kingdom, which had become the spoil of war. But Nicomedes 
							shaved his head and put on the freedman's cap and proclaimed himself an
							emancipated slave of the Roman people.

Shall we say, then, that Fortune makes men petty, timid, and abject in
							spirit? Yet it is not right for anyone to charge baseness to misfortune,
							or courage and intelligence to good fortune; but Fortune was magnified
							by Alexander's reign, for in him she was illustrious, invincible,
							magnanimous, inoffensive, and humane. Then, immediately after
							Alexander's decease, Leosthenes said
							that his forces, as they wandered here and there and fell foul of their
							own efforts, were like the Cyclops after his blinding, groping about
							everywhere with his hands, which were directed at no certain goal; even
							thus did that vast throng roam about with no safe footing, blundering
							through want of a leader. Or rather, in the manner of dead bodies, after
							the soul departs, when they are no longer held together by natural
							forces, but undergo dispersion and dissolution, and finally are
							dissipated and disappear altogether; even so Alexander's forces, having
							lost him, maintained a gasping, agitated, and fevered existence through
							men like Perdiccas, Meleager, Seleucus, and Antigonus, who, as it were,
							provided still a warm breath of life and blood that still pulsed and
							circulated. But at length the host wasted away and perished, generating
								 about itself maggots, as it were, of
							ignoble kings and rulers in their last death-struggle. This, then, it is
							likely that Alexander himself meant when he rebuked Hephaestion for
							quarrelling with Craterus: What said he, will be your power and your achievements if
								someone deprive you of Alexander? Rut I, for my part, shall not
							hesitate to say this very thing to the Fortune that presided over
							Alexander's career: What is your greatness or
								your repute? Where is your power or your invincibility, if someone
								deprive you of Alexander? That is to say, If someone deprive you of your skill in arms, your munificent use
								of riches, your self-restraint in expending them, your boldness
								against your foes in battle, your mildness toward the vanquished?
								Make another great, if you can; but one that shall not be generous
								with his substance, nor court danger in the front ranks, nor give
								honour to his friends, nor feel pity for his captives, nor be
								temperate in his pleasures, nor sleepless in crises, nor placable in
								his victories, nor humane amid his successes. What man is great in
								the exercise of power, if folly and wickedness attend him? Take away
								virtue from the fortunate man and in everything he is petty; in
								acts of generosity, through parsimony; in hard tasks, through
								softness; in religion, through superstition; towards the good,
								through envy; among men, through cowardice; among women, through
								wantonness. Just as inexpert artisans, who construct large
							pedestals for petty offerings, make the smallness of the offerings
							noticeable, so Fortune, whenever she elevates a petty character by acts
							that have a certain pomp and circumstance,
							makes the more conspicuous and disgraceful the blundering and
							instability that result from a shallow character.

Wherefore greatness lies, not in the possession of good things, but in
							our use of them, since even infant children inherit their fathers'
							kingdoms and dominions, even as Charillus, whom Lycurgus
							carried in his swaddling-clothes into the common dining-hall and
							proclaimed king of Sparta in place of himself. Assuredly it was not the
							child who was great, but he who surrendered to the child its paternal
							rights, and did not keep them for himself nor take them away. 
						 But who could have made Aridaeus great, whom,
							differing no whit from a child, only that his swaddlingclothes were
							royal purple, Meleager set on the throne of Alexander? And indeed it was
							well that he did so, that for a few days it might be observed how it is
							that men rule by right of virtue and how by gift of Fortune. For in
							succession to a real competitor for sovereignty Meleager introduced a
							mere actor, or rather, did a mute figure wearing a crown parade across
							the stage, as it were, of the inhabited world. Even a woman can carry a burden if a man impose it upon her. 
							 Conversely, however, one might affirm that it lies within the
							strength of even a woman or a child to take up and impose the gifts of
							power and wealth and sovereignty. The eunuch Bagoas took up the kingship of Persia and bestowed it upon Oarses
							and Darius. But the ability to sustain and
							administer great authority when one has once
							received it, and not to be crushed or turned from ones purpose by the
							weight and the magnitude of one's activities, is the mark of a man who
							possesses virtue, sense, and intelligence. This virtue Alexander
							possessed, whom some accuse of drunkenness and a passion for wine I Rut
							he was truly a great man, for in his conduct of affairs he was sober,
							nor was he made drunk nor led to revelling by authority and power; but
							others, when they get but a small portion, or even a taste, of power are
							unable to control themselves: 
								 Bad men, when gorged with wealth, or chancing on 
								 Some honours in the State, caper and prance 
								 When luck, unhoped for, to their house has come. 
								 
							 Cleitus, when he had scuttled three or four Greek triremes at
							Amorgos, caused himself to be proclaimed Poseidon and carried a trident.
							Demetrius, to whom Fortune added the little that she was able to
							subtract from Alexander's power, allowed himself to be called The Heaven-descended, 
							 and the
							subject states did not send ambassadors to him, but Sacred Deputies, and his replies they spoke
							of as Oracles. Lysimacho, who obtained
							possession of the regions adjoining Thrace, the mere outskirts of the
							kingdom of Alexander, as it were, reached such a pitch of arrogance and
							boldness as to say, The Byzantines now come to me
								when I am touching Heaven with my spear. But Pasiades of
							Byzantium, who was present, said, Let us be off,
								lest he make a hole in the sky with his spear-point! 
							 
						 
						 And yet why should anyone mention these men who might have some
							legitimate ground for pride because of Alexander, when even Clearchus,
							after he became despot of Heracleia, used to carry a
								thunderbolt, and named one of his sons Thunderer? And Dionysius the younger
							styled himself the son of Apollo in the inscription: Sprung from a Dorian mother by union with Phoebus
									Apollo. 
							 And Dionysius's father killed ten thousand or more citizens,
							and, led on by envy, betrayed his brother to the enemy, nor could he
							wait for his already aged mother to die a few days later, but strangled
								her ; yet in
							one of his tragedies he wrote these words : The mother of foul wrong is
								tyranny! Notwithstanding, of his daughters he named one
							Virtue, another Temperance, a third Justice. And yet other persons
							publicly styled themselves Benefactors, 
							Conquerors, Saviours, or The Great; but no one would be able to tell the
							tale of their marriages one after another, like the matings of horses,
							as they spent their days with no restraint amid herds of women, their
							corruption of boys, their beating of drums in the company of emasculated
							men, their daily dicing, their flute-playing in the public theatres, the
							night that was too short for them at their dinners, and the day at their
							breakfasts.

But Alexander took his breakfast at daybreak 
								seated ; he dined late
							in the evening; he drank only after sacrificing to the gods; he played
							dice with Medius when he had a fever ; he played games while travelling, at the same time also
							learning to wield a bow and mount a chariot. For himself he married
								Roxanê, the only woman he ever loved; but
								Stateira, the daughter of Darius, he married for
							imperial and political reasons, since the union of the two races was
							highly advantageous. But as for the other Persian women, he was as much
							their superior in self-control as in valour he was superior to Persian
							men. For he looked at no woman against her will and those
							that he looked at he passed by more readily than those that he did not
							look at; and although he bore himself humanely toward all other persons,
							it was toward fair youth alone that he conducted himself haughtily. He
							would not listen to a single word in praise of the beauty of the
								wife of Darius, who was a very handsome
							woman; but when she died, he graced her funeral with such a royal pomp
							and bewailed her death so feelingly that his self-control was questioned
							amid his display of humanity, and his goodness incurred the charge of
							wrongdoing. For Darius was disturbed by
							suspicion of Alexander's power and youth; for he also was still one of
							those who believed Alexander's victory to be through Fortune. But when
							he had tested the matter from every angle, and recognized the truth, Then, said he, the lot
								of the Persians is not so utterly wretched, nor will anyone say that
								we are altogether cowardly or unmanly in 
								that we have been overcome by such a man. But for my part I pray the
								gods for fair fortune and for might in war, that I may surpass
								Alexander in bestowing favours; and I am possessed by an ambitious
								and emulous desire to prove myself more humane than Alexander. But
								if my power be spent, do thou, O Zeus, ancestral god of the
								Persians, and ye other gods that guard our kingship, grant that none
								other than Alexander take his seat upon the throne of Cyrus. 
							This was Darius's way of adopting Alexander, invoking the gods as
							witnesses.

Thus do men prevail through Virtue. Ascribe to Fortune, if you will,
							Arbela and the Cilician victory and his other deeds of violence and war
							: Fortune battered down the walls of Tyre for him; Fortune
							opened the way to Egypt ; through Fortune Halicarnassus fell,
							and Miletus was captured, and Mazaeus left the Euphrates
							unguarded, and the Babylonian plain was strewn with corpses. But at
							least it was not in any way Fortune's gift that he was temperate, nor
							was it because of Fortune that he was self-controlled, nor did Fortune
							lock his soul and keep it impregnable to pleasure and invulnerable to
							desire; in fact, these were the qualities by which he defeated Darius
							himself. The rest were but defeats of arms and horses, battles,
							slaughters, and routs of men. But the truly great and indisputable
							defeat Darius suffered: he yielded in virtue and greatness of soul, in
							prowess and Justice, and marvelled at Alexander's invincibility in
							pleasure, in toil, in the bestowal of favours. It is true that
								Tarrias, son of Deinomenes,
							and Antigenes of Pallenê, and Philo t as, the son of Parinenion, were
							also invincible at least amid shields, pikes, battle-cries, and the
							clash of arms; but towards pleasures and women and gold and silver they
							were no better than their captives. In fact, when Alexander was freeing
							the Macedonians from debt and paying creditors for everybody, Tarrias said
							falsely that he was a debtor, and produced at the bank a person who
							asserted that he was Tarrias s creditor; later, when he was detected,
							he was ready to commit suicide had not Alexander, coming to know of
							this, exculpated him, and allowed him to keep the money; for the king
							remembered that when Philip was assaulting Perinthus, Tarrias, although
							his eye was pierced by a missile, would not submit nor suffer the shaft
							to be extracted until they had routed the enemy. 
						 Antigenes joined himself with
							those who were being sent back to Macedonia because of sickness or
								wounds, and had himself
							enrolled among them; but when, however, it was discovered that he had
							nothing wrong with him, but was feigning some infirmity, and it was seen
							that he was a stout fighting man whose body was covered with wounds, the
							matter vexed Alexander. When he asked the reason for such conduct,
							Antigenes confessed that he was in love with Telesippa, and was
							accompanying her to the sea, since he could not be left behind if she
							went away. Whose is she? asked Alexander, and to whom must we speak? Antigenes replied
							that she was free-born. Then, said Alexander, let us persuade her
								with promises and presents to remain behind. So ready was he
							with an excuse for every lover rather than for himself. 
						 And further, Philotas, 
							the son of Parmenion, had in his licentiousness the nurse, as it were,
							of all his ills. For among the captives taken at Damascus was a
							courtesan from Pella, by name Antigona. Ere this she had crossed over to
							Samothrace, and there had been taken captive by Autophradates. She was
							comely enough to look upon and, after Philotas had attached himself to
							her, she had complete possession of him. Indeed that man of iron was so softened
							that he was not in control of his reasoning powers amid his pleasures,
							but unlocked and brought forth many of his secrets for the woman: What was that famed Philip, were it not for
								Parmenion? What was this Alexander, were it not for Philotas? Where
								his Ammon, and where his serpents, if we do not wish it
								so? These words Antigona reported to an intimate friend of hers
							among the women, and she reported them to Craterus; Craterus brought
							Antigona herself secretly to Alexander, who did not touch her person,
							but restrained himself and, working secretly through her, he discovered
							the whole of Philotas's plans. And for a period of more than seven years
							Alexander never revealed his suspicion; not in his cups, the reputed
							drunkard I not in anger, this man of fiery
							temper! not to a friend, this man who trusted Hephaestion in everything
							and shared everything with him! In fact it is recorded that once, when he had broken the seal
							of a confidential letter from his mother and was reading it
								silently to himself, Hephaestion quietly put his head beside
							Alexander's and read the letter with him; Alexander could not bear to
							stop him, but took off his ring and placed the seal on Hephaestion's
							lips.

But one might grow weary in the enumeration of these matters by which
							Alexander is shown to have made the most honourable and the most regal
							use of his authority. And even though he became great through Fortune,
							he is even greater in that he made good use of his Fortune. And the more
							we praise his Fortune the more shall we exalt his Virtue by reason of
							which he became worthy of his Fortune. 
						 Now, however, I shall proceed at once to the first steps in his
							advancement and the beginnings of his power, and I shall examine in
							those matters the role played by Fortune, by reason of which men assert
							that Alexander became great through the instrumentality of Fortune. In
							Heaven's name! Why do they not assert this of one that never felt a
							wound nor lost a drop of blood nor ever served in Avar, whom the
							neighing of a horse 
							placed upon the throne of Cyrus, even as the first Darius, the son of
							Hystaspes? Or of Xerxes, whom a king, flattered by his wife, as Darius
							was flattered by Atossa, set upon the
							throne? Did the royal diadem come to Alexander's doors, as to Oarses through the
							machinations of Bagoas, who stripped from him the garb of a courier and
							put upon him the royal raiment and the tiara that ever stands erect ? Was he suddenly and unexpectedly chosen by
							lot and thus carne to rule the inhabited world, as at Athens the
							Thesmothetae and Archons attain their office? 
						 Would you learn how it is that men come to the throne by choice of
							Fortune? Once upon a time among the Argives the family of Heracleidae
							became extinct, from which family it was their ancestral custom to
							select the Argive kings. When in their search they made inquiry of the
							god at Delphi, he replied that an eagle would show them, and a few days
							later an eagle appeared on high and, swooping down, alighted on the
							house of Aegon, and Aegon was chosen king. 
						 Again in Paphos when the reigning king was seen to be unjust and wicked.
							Alexander expelled him and searched for another, since the family of
							Cinyradae appeared to be already passing away or extinct. However, they
							told him that there still survived one poor and obscure person, who eked
							out a forsaken existence in a certain garden. Men were sent to fetch him
							and, when they arrived, he was found watering his garden-plots; and he
							was much perturbed when the soldiers laid hands on him and ordered him
							to come with them. He was brought before Alexander and, dressed as he
							was in a single cheap garment, he was proclaimed king, and received the
							royal purple, and became one of those who are styled the king's Companions. His name was Abdalonymus. Thus does shifting Fortune
							create kings, change their raiment, and quickly and easily alter the
							status of men who cxpect nothing of the sort, and do not even hope for
							it.

But what greatness did Alexander acquire beyond his just merits, what
							without sweat, what without blood, what without a price, what without
							labour? He drank rivers fouled with blood, crossed streams bridged by
							dead bodies, through hunger ate the first grass that he saw, dug through
							nations buried in deep snow 
							and cities built beneath the earth, sailed over a battling sea ; and as he traversed the
							parching strands of Gedrosia and Arachosia, it
							was in the sea, not on the land, that first he saw a living plant. 
						 If to Fortune, as to a human being, one might present Frankness in
							Alexander's behalf, would she not say, When and where did you ever
							vouchsafe a way for the exploits of Alexander? What fortress did he ever
							capture by your help without the shedding of blood? What city unguarded
							or what regiment unarmed did you deliver into his hands? What king was
							found to be indolent, or what general negligent, or what watchman asleep
							at the gate? But no river was easy to cross, no storm was moderate, no
							summer's heat was without torment. Betake yourself to Antiochus, the son
							of Seleucus, or to Artaxerxes, the brother of Cyrus; depart to Ptolemy
							Philadelphus! Their fathers, while yet alive, proclaimed them kings; they won battles that did not cost
							a tear; they made merry all their lives in processions and theatres;
							and every one of them, because of good fortune, grew old upon the
							throne. 
						 But in the case of Alexander, though I were to mention nothing else,
							behold his body gashed with wounds from tip to toe, bruised all
							over, smitten at the hands of his enemies Now
								with the spear, now the sword, now with mighty masses of
									boulders. 
							 On the banks of the Granicus his helmet was cleft
							through to his scalp by a sword; at Gaza his shoulder was wounded by a
							missile; at Maracanda his shin was so torn by an arrow that by the
							force of the blow the larger bone was broken and extruded. Somewhere in
							Hyrcania his neck was smitten by a stone, whereby his sight was dimmed,
							and for many days he was haunted by the fear of blindness. Among the
							Assacenians his ankle was wounded by an Indian arrow; that was the time
							when he smilingly said to his flatterers, ‘this that you see is blood,
							not Ichor, that which flows from the wounds of
								the blessed immortals.’ 
							 At Issus he was wounded in the thigh with a sword, as
								Chares states, by Darius
							the king, who had come into hand-to-hand conflict with him. Alexander
							himself wrote of this simply, and with complete truth, in a letter to
							Antipater: ‘I myself happened,’ he writes, ‘to be wounded in the thigh
							by a dagger. But nothing untoward resulted from the blow either immediately or later.’ Among the Mallians he
							was wounded in the breast by an arrow three feet long, which penetrated
							his breastplate, and someone rode up under him, arid struck him in the
							neck, as Aristobulus relates. When he had crossed the Taiiais against
							the Scythians and had routed them, he pursued them on horseback an
							hundred and fifty stades, though he was grievously distressed with
								diarrhoea.

Well done. Fortune! You exalt Alexander and make
								him great by running him through from every side, by making him lose
								his footing, by laying open every portion of his body. Not like
								Athena before Menelaüs did you guide the
								missile to the stoutest parts of his armour, and by breastplate,
								belt, and kilt take away the intensity of the blow, which only
								grazed his body with force enough to cause blood to flow; but you
								exposed to the missiles the vital portions of Alexander's body
								unprotected, you drove home the blows through his very bones, you
								circled about his body, you laid siege to his eyes and his feet, you
								hindered him in pursuing his foes, you endeavoured to strip him of
								his victories, you upset his expectations. 
						 
						 No other king seems to me to have felt the hand of Fortune more heavily
							upon him, even though on many it has fallen harshly and malignantly. But
							like a thunderbolt it cut down the other rulers, and destroyed them;
							toward Alexander, however, Fortune's ill-will became but contentious and
							quarrelsome and hard to overpower, even as it was toward Heracles. For
							what manner of Typhons or monstrous giants did
							she not raise up to oppose him? Whom of his foes did she not fortify
							with a vast supply of weapons or deep rivers or jagged cliffs or the
							might of beasts from foreign lands ? But if Alexander's
							thought had not been set on high emprise, if it had not derived its
							impelling force from great Virtue, and had not refused to submit to
							defeat in its wrestling with Fortune, would he not have grown tired and
							weary of marshalling and arming his forces, weary of his sieges and
							pursuits amid unnumbered revolts, desertions, and riots of subject
							peoples, defections of kings, against Bactria, Maracanda, Sogdiana, as
							if he were cutting off the heads of a hydra which ever grew again in
							renewed wars among these faithless and conspiring peoples?

I shall be thought to be making a strange statement, yet what I shall say
							is true: it was because of Fortune that Alexander all but lost the
							repute of being the son of Ammon! For what offspring of the gods could
							have toiled through such hazardous, toilsome, and painful Labours save
							only Heracles, the son of Zeus? But it was one arrogant man who imposed
							upon Heracles the task of capturing lions, of pursuing wild boars, of
							frightening off birds so that he might not have time to go about
							performing greater deeds, such as punishing men like Antaeus and
							stopping creatures like Busiris from their abominable murders.
							But upon Alexander it was Virtue who laid the kingly and god-like
							Labour, the end and aim of which was not gold, carried about by
							countless camels, nor Persian luxury, banquets, and women, nor the wine
								 of Chalybon, nor the fish of Hyrcania, but to order all men by one law and
							to render them submissive to one rule and accustomed to one manner of
							life. The desire which he cherished to accomplish this task was
							implanted in him from childhood, and was fostered and increased with the
							years that passed. Once, when ambassadors carne from the Persian king to
							Philip, who was not at home, Alexander, while he entertained them
								hospitably, asked ho childish
							questions, as the others did, about the vine of gold, or the Hanging Gardens, or how the Great
							King was arrayed; but he was completely engrossed with the most vital
							concerns of the dominion, asking how large was the Persian army; where
							the king stationed himself in battle (even as the famed Odysseus asked Where are his arms that he wields in the battle,
								and where are his horses?); and which roads were the
							shortest for travellers going inland from the sea - so that the
							strangers were astounded and said, This boy is a
								‘great king’; our king is only wealthy. But after Philip's end,
							when Alexander was eager to cross over and, already absorbed in his
							hopes and preparations, was hastening to gain a hold upon Asia, Fortune,
							seizing upon him, blocked his way, turned him about, dragged him back,
							and surrounded him with countless distractions and delays. First she
							threw into the utmost commotion the barbarian elements among his
							neighbours, and contrived wars with the Illyrians and Triballians. By these wars he was
							drawn from his Asiatic projects as far away as the portion of Scythia
							that lies along the Danube; when, by sundry
							manoeuvres, he had subjugated all this territory with much danger and
							great struggles, he was again eager and in haste for the crossing.
							Again, however, Fortune stirred up Thebes against him, and thrust in his
							pathway a war with Greeks, and the dread necessity of punishing, by
							means of slaughter and fire and sword, men that were his kith and
								kin, 
							a necessity which had a most unpleasant ending. 
						 
						 After this he crossed with provision for thirty days, as Phylarchus 
							relates; but Aristobulus says, with seventy talents. He divided the
							greater part of his possessions at home and his royal revenues among his
							friends; Perdiccas alone would take
							nothing when Alexander offered, but asked, What,
								are you leaving for yourself, Alexander? And when Alexander
							replied, High hopes! , Then, said Perdiccas, we also shall share
								in these; for it is not right to take your possessions, but right
								to wait in expectation of those of Darius.

What, then, were the hopes on which Alexander relied when he crossed into
							Asia? Not a force counted by means of a wall that would hold a city of
							10,000 men, nor
							fleets that sailed through mountains, nor scourges or
							fetters, insane and barbaric implements for chastising the sea ; but externally they were the
							great ambition in his little army, mutual rivalry of hot youth,
							competition for repute and excellence among his Companions. And within
							himself he had his own high hopes, reverence for the gods, fidelity
							toward his friends, frugality, self-control, experience, fearlessness
							toward death, high courage, humanity, affability, integrity of
							character, constancy in counsel, quickness in execution, the height of
							good repute, and a disposition to gain his end in everything honourable.
							For not appropriately nor convincingly did Homer employ a
							combination of three similes in his comparison describing the fair
							appearance of Agamemnon: 
								 Like in his eyes and his head unto Zeus who delighteth in
									thunder, 
								 Like unto Ares in waist, and in breadth of his chest to
									Poseidon. 
							 But if the god who begat Alexander made his natural endowment
							an harmoniously joined combination of many virtues, may we not say that
							he possessed the high spirit of Cyrus, the discretion of Agesilaüs, the
							intelligence of Themistocles,the experience of Philip, the daring of
							Brasidas, the eloquence and statesmanship of Pericles? And, to compare
							him with the men of still more ancient days, he was more self-restrained
							than Agamemnon; for Agamemnon set a captive woman above his wedded wife,but
							Alexander, even before his marriage, kept aloof from his captives. He
							was more magnanimous than Achilles; for Achilles gave back
							the body of Hector for a small ransom, but Alexander buried Darius at
							great expense; Achilles, when he had
							become reconciled, accepted gifts and
							recompense from his friends to requite him for ceasing from his Wrath,
							but Alexander enriched his enemies by conquering them. He was more
							reverent than Diomedes ; for
							Diomedes was ready to fight with gods, but Alexander believed the gods
							to be the authors of all success. He was more deeply mourned by his
							relatives than was Odysseus; for Odysseus' mother
							died of grief, but the mother of Alexander's foe, for the
							goodwill she bore him, shared his death.

In short, if Solon's statesmanship also was due to Fortune, and if
							Miltiades' generalship, and Aristeides' justice were but the
							result of Fortune, then surely there is no work of Virtue in these men,
							but it is a name only, talk based on appearance, pervading their lives
							to no purpose, a figment of the sophists and legislators. But if every
							one of these men and of others like them became poor or rich, weak or
							strong, ugly or handsome, lived to a ripe old age or met an untimely
							death through Fortune, or if each one of them proved himself a great
							general, a great lawgiver, or great in government and statesmanship
							through Virtue and Reason, then consider Alexander and compare him with
							them all. Solon brought about a cancellation of debts in Athens which he
							called the Relief from Burdens (Seisachtheia);
							but Alexander himself paid the debts which his men owed to their
								creditors. Pericles collected
							tribute from the Greeks and with the money adorned the Acropolis with temples; but Alexander captured the
							riches of barbarians and sent them to Greece with orders that ten
							thousand talents be used to construct temples for
							the gods. 
								Brasidas's 
							dash along the shore to Methonê through the armed host of the enemy amid
							showers of missiles made him renowned in Greece; but that daring leap
							of Alexander in the country of the Oxydrachae, incredible to them that hear of it and
							fearful to them that saw it, when he hurled himself down from the walls
							into the midst of the enemy, who received him with spears and arrows and
							naked swords-with what may one compare it, save with the levin bolt that
							breaks and flashes in the midst of a hurricane, like the apparition of
							Phoebus that darted down to earth, gleaming
							round about with flaming armour. The enemy at first were amazed and
							affrighted and retired with trembling fear; but a moment later, when
							they saw that he was but one man attacking many, they made a stand
							against him. 
						 There indeed Fortune made manifest great and splendid results of her
							kindliness toward Alexander, when she cast him into an insignificant
							foreign town and shut him in and fenced him round about! And when his
							men wTere earnestly trying to bring help from without and were
							attempting to scale the wails, Fortune, by breaking and shattering their
							ladders, took away their foothold and hurled them from the walls. And of
							the three men who
							alone were quick enough to grasp the wall and, throwing themselves down inside, to take their stand beside the
							king, Fortune straightway snatched up one and made away with him before
							he could strike a blow; and a second, pierced through by many arrows,
							was only so far from death that he could see and perceive his king's
							danger. But the charges and shouting of the Macedonians were unavailing
							for they had no machines nor siege engines with them; but in their zeal
							they tried to hack the walls with their swords, and were forced to break
							them off with their bare hands, and all but bite their way through. 
						 But the king, who was Fortune's favourite, and was always guarded and
							personally protected by her, was caught within like a wild beast in the
							toils, alone and without succour; nor was he struggling for Susa or
							Babylon, nor to capture Bactriaj nor to vanquish the great Porus; for
							in great and glorious conflicts, even though men fail, disgrace, at
							least, can find no place. But so contentious and malicious was Fortune,
							so greatly did she favour barbarians and hate Alexander, that she tried
							to destroy not only his body and his life, but also, in so far as she
							could, to destroy his repute and to wipe out his fair fame. For it were
							not a terrible thing for Alexander to fall and lie buried beside the
							Euphrates or the Hydaspes, nor ignoble to meet death by coming into
							close combat with Darius or in confronting the horses and swords and
							battle-axes of the Persians as they fought to defend their king, nor to
							be overthrown while he bestrode the walls of Babylon and to fall from
							his high hope. Thus fell Pelopidas and Epameinondas; their death was a
							death belonging to Virtue, not to misfortune, engaged as they were in
							such a high emprise. But of what sort was the deed of Fortune, who is
							now under scrutiny? Was it not that on the
							farthest outposts of a land beside a foreign river within the walls of
							an obscure hamlet, which surrounded and hid away. from sight the lord
							and master of the inhabited world, he should perish, smitten and
							stricken by ignominious weapons and whatever else lay at hand? For his
							head was wounded through his helmet by an axe, and someone shot an arrow
							through his breastplate so that it penetrated the bones of his breast
							and was lodged there firmly, while the shaft protruded and hampered him
							and the iron point was four fingers broad and five fingers long. But - the extreme of all the dangers he confronted -
							while he was defending himself against those who attacked him in front,
							the archer who shot him had plucked up courage to approach him with a
							sword, but Alexander with his dagger was too quick for the man and
							knocked him down and killed him; but while he was thus occupied,
							someone ran out from a mill, and gave him a blow on the neck with a
							cudgel from behind; this confused his senses, and his head swam. But
							Virtue was by his side and in him she engendered daring, and in his
							companions strength and zeal. For men like Limnaeus and Ptolemy and
							Leonnatus and all those who had surmounted the wall or had broken
							through it took their stand before him and were a bulwark of Virtue,
							exposing their bodies in the face of the foe and even their lives for
							the goodwill and love they bore their king. Surely it is not due to
							Fortune that the companions of good kings risk their lives and willingly
							die for them; but this they do through a
							passion for Virtue, even as bees, as if under the spell of love-charms,
							approach and closely surround their sovereign. 
						 What spectator, then, who might without danger to himself have been
							present at that scene, would not exclaim that he was witnessing the
							mighty contest of Fortune and Virtue; that through Fortune the foreign
							host was prevailing beyond its deserts, but through Virtue the Greeks
							were holding out beyond their ability? And if the enemy gains the upper
							hand, this will be the work of Fortune or of some jealous deity or of
							divine retribution; but if the Greeks prevail, it will be Virtue and
							daring, friendship and fidelity, that will win the guerdon of victory?
							These were, in fact, the only support that Alexander had with him at
							this time, since Fortune had put a barrier between him and the rest of
							his forces and equipment, fleets, horse, and camp. 
						 Finally, the Macedonians routed the barbarians, and, when they had
							fallen, pulled down their city on their heads. But this was no help to
							Alexander; for he had been hurried from the field, arrow and all, and
							he had the shaft in his vitals; the arrow was as a bond or bolt holding
							his breastplate to his body. And when they tried forcibly to pull it out
							of the wound by the roots, as it were, the iron would not budge, since
							it was lodged in the bony part of the breast in front of the heart. They
							did not dare to saw off the protruding portion of the shaft, since they
							were afraid that the bone might be split by the jarring and cause
							excruciating pain, and that an internal haemorrhage might result. But
							when Alexander perceived their great perplexity and hesitation, he
							himself tried with his dagger to cut off the arrow close to his breastplate; but his hand was
							unsteady and affected by a torpid languor from the inflammation of the
							wound. Accordingly with encouraging words he urged those that were
							unwounded to take hold and not to be afraid; and he railed at some who
							were weeping and could not control themselves, others he branded as
							deserters, since they had not the courage to Come to his assistance. And
							he cried aloud to his Companions, Let no one be
								fainthearted even for my sake! For it will not be believed that I
								do not fear death, if you fear death for me!