INTRODUCTION 
 
					Many will find this little jeu d'esprit as pleasant
					reading as anything in Plutarch. In part, this may
					be due to its (perhaps accidental) brevity; but its
					originality and freshness are undeniable. These
					qualities have, to be sure, puzzled a number of
					scholars who are still disputing whether the sources
					are principally Epicurean or Peripatetic or Cynic.
					Nothing quite like it is known elsewhere, which sad
					lack baffles the Quellenforscher . So, rather than allow
					a touch of spontaneous imagination to Plutarch, it
					has been confidently asserted that the dialogue must
					come from the school of Menippus, or be an attempt
					to turn the tables on Polystratus, and so on.
				 
 
					Everything must have a source (if only the author's
					ingenuity) and the source here, so far as it can be
					predicated with any certainty, is the tenth book of
					the Odyssey seen through the humorous eyes of a
					young Boeotian. We have here, then, a Boeotian
					
					 
					
					pig instructing the favourite of Athena. It was once
					fashionable to assert, or imply, that since Plutarch
					was once a young Boeotian himself, matters could
					not be so simple, nor could he be the author. But
					the climate of scholarship is, perhaps, changing.
					There are few of Plutarch's admirers who will not
					claim this lively work for one of his more admirable
					achievements, written, perhaps, when he was quite
					young.
				 
 
					Even if the authorship is accepted without hesitation, there is little else that is certain except that
					the Stoics are constantly under attack, though rather
					less directly than in the preceding dialogue. There
					is grave doubt about the title: is it no. 127 or no.
					135 in the Lamprias Catalogue? Or, as it has become popular to call it, is it really the Gryllus ? 
					There are a number of troublesome lacunae; the
					work, as it stands, ends suddenly with a gay witticism instead of being continued to a more conventional termination. It is only too likely that the
					more mature Plutarch would have gone on and on;
					but what would the clever young man who concocted
					this conceit have done? 
				 
 
					For once, there is a good translation, or paraphrase,
					the German one of Bruno Snell in his Plutarch 
					
					 
					
					(Zürich, 1948), though this version gives almost too
					exciting an impression of vivacity and wit by omitting
					the more tiresome sections.
				 
 
					Those interested in Gryllus' remarks on the indecent ways in which men pervert animals to their
					taste will find a sympathetic exposition in E. G.
					Boulenger's Animal Mysteries (London, 1927).

(The speakers in the dialogue are Odysseus,
					Circe, and Gryllus.)
				 
 ODYSSEUS. These facts, Circe, I believe I have
					learned and shall not forget them; yet I should be
					happy to learn from you further whether there are
					any Greeks among those whom you have changed
					from the shape of men into wolves and lions. 
				 
 
					 CIRCE. Quite a few, beloved Odysseus. But what
					is your reason for asking this question? 
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. It is, I swear, because it would bring
					me noble glory among the Greeks if by your favour
					I should restore comrades of mine to their original
					humanity and not allow them to grow old in the
					unnatural guise of beasts, leading an existence that
					is so piteous and shameful. 
				 
 
					 CIRCE. Here's a lad who finds it appropriate that
					not only himself and his companions, but even total
					strangers should, through his stupidity, find his ambition their ruin. 
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. This is a new potion of words that you
					are stirring and drugging for me, Circe. It will certainly
					
					 
					
					transform me literally into a beast if I am to
					take your word for it that changing from beast to man
					spells ruin.
				 
 
 	 CIRCE. Haven't you already worked a stranger
					magic than this on yourself? You who refused an
					ageless, immortal life at my side and would struggle
					through a thousand new dangers to a woman who is
					mortal and, I can assure you, no longer so very
					young - and this for no object other than to make
					yourself more gaped at and renowned than you
					already are, pursuing an empty phantom instead of
					what is truly good. 
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. All right, let it be as you say, Circe.
					Why must we quarrel again and again about the
					same matters? Now please just grant me the favour
					of letting the men go free.
				 
 
 	 CIRCE. By the Black Goddess, it's not so simple
					as that. These creatures are no run of the mill. You
					must ask them first if they are willing. If they say
					no, my hero, you'll have to argue with them and
					convince them. And if you don't, and they win the
					argument, then you must be content with having
					exercised poor judgement about yourself and your
					friends. 
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. Dear lady, why are you making fun of
					me? How can they argue with me or I with them
					so long as they are asses and hogs and lions?
				 
 
 	 CIRCE. Courage, courage, my ambitious friend.
					I'll see to it that you shall find them both receptive
					and responsive. Or rather, one of the number will
					be enough to thrust and parry for them all. Presto!
					You may talk with this one. 
					
					 
					
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. And how am I to address him, Circe?
					Who in the world was he? 
				 
 
 	 CIRCE. What's that to do with the issue? Call
					him Gryllus, if you like. I'll retire now to avoid any
					suggestion that he is arguing against his own convictions to curry favour with me.

GRYLLUS. Hello, Odysseus.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. And you too, Gryllus, for heaven's sake!
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. What do you want to ask?
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. Since I am aware that you have been
					men, I feel sorry for all of you in your present plight;
					yet it is only natural that I should be more concerned
					for those of you who were Greeks before you fell into
					this misfortune. So now I have asked Circe to remove
					the spell from any Greek who chooses and restore
					him to his original shape and let him go back home
					with us.
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. Stop, Odysseus! Not a word more!
					You see, we don't any of us think much of you either,
					for evidently it was a farce, that talk of your cleverness and your fame as one whose intelligence far
					surpassed the rest - a man who boggles at the simple
					matter of changing from worse to better because he
					hasn't considered the matter. For just as children
					dread the doctor's doses and run from lessons, the
					very things that, by changing them from invalids
					and fools, will make them healthier and wiser, just
					so you have shied away from the change from one
					shape to another. At this very moment you are not
					only living in fear and trembling as a companion of
					
					 
					
					Circe, frightened that she may, before you know it,
					turn you into a pig or a wolf, but you are also trying
					to persuade us, who live in an abundance of good
					things, to abandon them, and with them the lady
					who provides them, and sail away with you, when we
					have again become men, the most unfortunate of all
					creatures!
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. To me, Gryllus, you seem to have lost
					not only your shape, but your intelligence also under
					the influence of that drug. You have become infected with strange and completely perverted notions. Or was it rather an inclination to swinishness
					that conjured you into this shape? 
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. Neither of these, king of the Cephallenians. But if it is your pleasure to discuss the
					matter instead of hurling abuse, I shall quickly make
					you see that we are right to prefer our present life in
					place of the former one, now that we have tried both.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. Go on. I should like to hear you.

GRYLLUS. And I, in that case, to instruct you.
					Let us begin with the virtues, which, we note, inspire
					you with pride; for you rate yourselves as far superior
					to animals in justice and wisdom and courage and
					all the rest of them. But answer me this, wisest of
					men! Once I heard you telling Circe about the land
					of the Cyclopes, that though it is not ploughed at
					all nor does anyone sow there, yet it is naturally so
					fertile and fecund that it produces spontaneously
					
					 
					
					every kind of crops. Do you, then, rate this land
					higher than rugged, goat-pasturing Ithaca, which
					barely yields the tiller a meagre, churlish, trifling
					crop after great efforts and much toil? And see
					that you don't lose your temper and give me a
					patriotic answer that isn't what you really believe.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. I have no need to lie; for though I love
					and cherish my native soil more, the other wins my
					approval and admiration.
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. Then this, we shall say, is the situation:
					the wisest of men thinks fit to commend and approve
					one thing while he loves and prefers another. Now
					I assume that your answer applies to the spiritual
					field also, for the situation is the same as with the
					land : that spiritual soil is better which produces a
					harvest of virtue as a spontaneous crop without toil.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. Yes, this too you may assume.
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. At this moment, then, you are conceding
					the point that the soul of beasts has a greater natural
					capacity and perfection for the generation of virtue;
					for without command or instruction, unsown and
						unploughed, as it were, it naturally brings forth and
					develops such virtue as is proper in each case.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. And what sort of virtue, Gryllus, is ever
					found in beasts?

GRYLLUS. Ask rather what sort of virtue is not
					found in them more than in the wisest of men? Take
					first, if you please, courage, in which you take great
					pride, not even pretending to blush when you are
					called valiant and sacker of cities. 
 Yet you,
					
					 
					
					you villain, are the man who by tricks and frauds
					have led astray men who knew only a straightforward,
					noble style of war and were unversed in deceit and
					lies; while on your freedom from scruple you confer
					the name of the virtue that is least compatible with
					such nefariousness. Wild beasts, however, you will
					observe, are guileless and artless in their struggles,
					whether against one another or against you, and
					conduct their battles with unmistakably naked
					courage under the impulse of genuine valour. No
					edict summons them, nor do they fear a writ of
					desertion. No, it is their nature to flee subjection;
					with a stout heart they maintain an indomitable
					spirit to the very end. Nor are they conquered even
					when physically overpowered; they never give up
					in their hearts, even while perishing in the fray. In
					many cases, when beasts are dying, their valour
					withdraws together with the fighting spirit to some
					point where it is concentrated in one member and
					resists the slayer with convulsive movements and
					fierce anger until, like a fire, it is completely extinguished and departs.
				 
 
					Beasts never beg or sue for pity or acknowledge
					defeat: lion is never slave to lion, or horse to horse
					through cowardice, as man is to man when he
					unprotestingly accepts the name whose root is
					cowardice. And when men have subdued beasts by
					snares and tricks, such of them as are full grown
					refuse food and endure the pangs of thirst until they
					
					 
					
					induce and embrace death in place of slavery. But
					nestlings and cubs, which by reason of age are tender
					and docile, are offered many beguiling allurements
					and enticements that act as drugs. These give them
					a taste for unnatural pleasures and modes of life, and
					in time make them spiritless to the point where they
					accept and submit to their so-called taming, which
					is really an emasculation of their fighting spirit.
				 
 
					These facts make it perfectly obvious that bravery
					is an innate characteristic of beasts, while in human
					beings an independent spirit is actually contrary to
					nature. The point that best proves this, gentle
					Odysseus, is the fact that in beasts valour is naturally
					equal in both sexes and the female is in no way
					inferior to the male. She takes her part both in the
					struggle for existence and in the defence of her brood. 
					You have heard, I suppose, of the sow of Crommyon 
					which, though a female beast, caused so much trouble
					to Theseus. That famous Sphinx would have got
					no good of her wisdom as she sat on the heights of
					Mt. Phicium, weaving her riddles and puzzles, if she
					had not continued to surpass the Thebans greatly in
					power and courage. Somewhere thereabouts lived
					also the Teumesian vixen, a thing atrocious 
 ;
					and not far away, they say, was the Pythoness who
					
					 
					
					fought with Apollo for the oracle at Delphi. Your
					king received Aethe from the Sicyonian as a
					recompense for excusing him from military service,
					making a very wise choice when he preferred a fine,
					spirited mare to a cowardly man. You yourself have
					often observed in panthers and lionesses that the
					female in no way yields to the male in spirit and
					valour. Yet, while you are off at the wars, your wife
					sits at home by the fire and troubles herself not so
					much as a swallow to ward off those who come against
					herself and her home - and this though she is a
					Spartan born and bred. So why should I go on to
					mention Carian or Maeonian women? Surely from
					what has been said it is perfectly obvious that men
					have no natural claim to courage ; if they did,
					women would have just as great a portion of valour.
					It follows that your practice of courage is brought
					about by legal compulsion, which is neither voluntary
					nor intentional, but in subservience to custom and
					censure and moulded by extraneous beliefs and arguments. When you face toils and dangers, you do so
					not because you are courageous, but because you are
					more afraid of some alternative. For just as that
					one of your companions who is the first to board ship
					stands up to the light oar, not because he thinks
					nothing of it, but because he fears and shuns the
					heavier one ; just so he who accepts the lash to
					
					 
					
					escape the sword, or meets a foe in battle rather than
					be tortured or killed, does so not from courage to face
					the one situation, but from fear of the other. So it is
					clear that all your courage is merely the cowardice
					of prudence and all your valour merely fear that has
					the good sense to escape one course by taking
					another. And, to sum up, if you think that you are
					better in courage than beasts, why do your poets call
					the doughtiest fighters wolf-minded 
 and lion-hearted 
 and like a boar in valour, 
 though no
						poet ever called a lion man-hearted or a boar
					 like a man in valour ? But, I imagine, just as when
					those who are swift are called wind-footed 
 and
					those who are handsome are called godlike, 
 there
					is exaggeration in the imagery; just so the poets
					bring in a higher ideal when they compare mighty
					warriors to something else. And the reason is that
					the spirit of anger is, as it were, the tempering or
					the cutting edge of courage. Now beasts use this
					undiluted in their contests, whereas you men have
					it mixed with calculation, as wine with water, so that
					it is displaced in the presence of danger and fails you
					when you need it most. Some of you even declare
					that anger should not enter at all into fighting, but
					be dismissed in order to make use of sober calculation ; their contention is correct so far as selfpreservation goes, but is disgracefully false as regards
					valorous defence. For surely it is absurd for you to
					find fault with Nature because she did not equip
					
					 
					
					your bodies with natural stings, or place fighting
					tusks among your teeth, or give you nails like curved
					claws, while you yourselves remove or curb the
					emotional instrument that Nature has given.

ODYSSEUS. Bless me, Gryllus, you must once
					have been a very clever sophist, one may judge,
					since even as things are, and speaking from your
					swinishness, you can attack the subject with such
					fervent ardour. But why have you failed to discuss
					temperance, the next in order?
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. Because I thought that you would first
					wish to take exception to what I have said. But
					you are eager to hear about temperance since you
					are the husband of a model of chastity and believe
					that you yourself have given a proof of self-control
					by rejecting the embraces of Circe. And in this you
					are no more continent than any of the beasts; for
					neither do they desire to consort with their betters,
					but pursue both pleasure and love with mates of like
					species. So it is no wonder that, like the Mendesian 
					goat in Egypt which, when shut up with many
					beautiful women, is said not to be eager to consort
					with them, but is far more excited about nannies,
					you likewise are contented with the kind of love that
					is familiar to you and, being a mortal, are not eager
					to sleep with a goddess. As for the chastity of
					Penelope, the cawing of countless crows will pour
					laughter and contempt upon it; for every crow, if
					her mate dies, remains a widow, not merely for a
					
					 
					
					short time, but for nine generations of men. It
					follows that your fair Penelope is nine times inferior
					in chastity to any crow you please.

Now since you are not unaware that I am a
					sophist, let me marshal my arguments in some order
					by defining temperance and analysing the desires
					according to their kinds. Temperance, then, is a curtailment and an ordering of the desires that eliminate those that are extraneous or superfluous and
					discipline in modest and timely fashion those that
					are essential. You can, of course, observe countless
					differences in the desires ... and the desire to
					eat and drink is at once natural and essential, while
					the pleasures of love, which, though they find their
					origin in nature, yet may be forgone and discarded
					without much inconvenience, have been called
					natural, but not essential. But there are desires of
					another kind, neither essential nor natural, that are
					imported in a deluge from without as a result of
					your inane illusions and because you lack true culture.
					So great is their multitude that the natural desires
					are, every one of them, all but overwhelmed, as
					though an alien rabble were overpowering the native
					citizenry. But beasts have souls completely inaccessible and closed to these adventitious passions and
					live their lives as free from empty illusions as though
					they dwelt far from the sea. They fall short in the
					matter of delicate and luxurious living, but solidly
					
					 
					
					protect their sobriety and the better regulation of
					their desires since those that dwell within them are
					neither numerous nor alien.
				 
 
					Certainly there was a time when I myself, no less
					than you now, was dazzled by gold and held it to be
					an incomparable possession; so likewise I was caught
					by the lure of silver and ivory and the man who had
					most property of this sort seemed to me to be a
					blissful favourite of the gods, whether he was a
					Phrygian or a Carian, one more villainous than
					Dolon or more unfortunate than Priam. In that
					situation, constantly activated by these desires, I
					reaped no joy or pleasure from the other things of
					life, which I had sufficiently and to spare. I grumbled
					at my life, finding myself destitute of the most important things and a loser in the lottery of fortune.
					This is the reason why, as I recall, when I saw you
					once in Crete tricked out in holiday attire, it was not
					your intellect or your virtue that I envied, but the
					softness of the elegantly woven garment and the
					beautiful wool of your purple cloak that I admired and
					gaped at (the clasp, I believe, was of gold and had
					some frivolity worked on it in exquisitely fine intaglio). I followed you about as enchanted as a woman.
					But now I am rid and purified of all those empty illusions. I have no eyes for gold and silver and can
					pass them by just like any common stone; and as for
					your fine robes and tapestries, I swear there's nothing
					sweeter for me to rest in when I'm full than deep,
					
					 
					
					soft mud. None, then, of such adventitious desires
					has a place in our souls; our life for the most part is
					controlled by the essential desires and pleasures. As
					for those that are non-essential, but merely natural,
					we resort to them without either irregularity or excess.

Let us, in fact, first describe these pleasures.
					Our pleasure in fragrant substances, those that by
					their nature stimulate our sense of smell, besides the
					fact that our enjoyment of this is simple and costs
					nothing, also contributes to utility by providing a
					way for us to tell good food from bad. For the
					tongue is said to be, and is, a judge of what is sweet
					or bitter or sour, when liquid flavours combine and fuse
					with the organ of taste; but our sense of smell, even
					before we taste, is a judge that can much more
					critically distinguish the quality of each article of
					food than any royal taster in the world. It admits
					what is proper, rejects what is alien, and will not let
					it touch or give pain to the taste, but informs on and
					denounces what is bad before any harm is done. And
					in other respects smell is no nuisance to us, as it is to
					you, forcing you to collect and mix together incense
					of one kind or another and cinnamon and nard 
					and malobathrum and Arabian aromatic reeds, 
					with the aid of a formidable dyer's or witch's art, of
					the sort to which you give the name of unguentation,
					
					 
					
					thus buying at a great price an effeminate, emasculating luxury which has absolutely no real use. Yet,
					though such is its nature, it has depraved not only
					every woman, but lately the greater part of men as
					well, so that they refuse to sleep even with their own
					wives unless they come to bed reeking with myrrh
					and scented powders. But sows attract boars and
					nannies bucks and other female creatures their consorts by means of their own special odours; scented,
					as they are, with pure dew and grassy meadows, they
					are attracted to the nuptial union by mutual affection. The females are not coy and do not cloak
					their desires with deceits or trickeries or denials;
					nor do the males, driven on by the sting of mad lust,
					purchase the act of procreation by money or toil or
					servitude. No! Both parties celebrate at the
					proper time a love without deceit or hire, a love
					which in the season of spring awakens, like the
					burgeoning of plants and trees, the desire of animals,
					and then immediately extinguishes it. Neither does
					the female continue to receive the male after she has
					conceived, nor does the male attempt her. So slight
					and feeble is the regard we have for pleasure: our
					whole concern is with Nature. Whence it comes
					about that to this very day the desires of beasts have
					encompassed no homosexual mating. But you have
					a fair amount of such trafficking among your high
					and mighty nobility, to say nothing of the baser
					
					 
					
					sort. Agamemnon came to Boeotia hunting for
					Argynnus, who tried to elude him, and slandering
					the sea and winds ... then he gave his noble self
					a noble bath in Lake Copaïs to drown his passion
					there and get rid of his desire. Just so Heracles, 
					pursuing a beardless lad, lagged behind the other
					heroes and deserted the expedition. On the
					Rotunda of Ptoian Apollo one of your men secretly
					inscribed FAIR IS ACHILLES - when Achilles already
					had a son. And I hear that the inscription is still in
					place. But a cock that mounts another for the lack
					of a female is burned alive because some prophet or
					seer declares that such an event is an important and
					terrible omen. On this basis even men themselves
					acknowledge that beasts have a better claim to
					temperance and the non-violation of nature in their
					pleasures. Not even Nature, with Law for her ally,
					can keep within bounds the unchastened vice of
					your hearts; but as though swept by the current of
					their lusts beyond the barrier at many points, men
					do such deeds as wantonly outrage Nature, upset her
					order, and confuse her distinctions. For men have,
					in fact, attempted to consort with goats and sows
					and mares, and women have gone mad with lust for
					
					 
					
					male beasts. From such unions your Minotaurs 
					and Aegipans, and, I suppose, your Sphinxes and
					Centaurs have arisen. Yet it is through hunger
					that dogs have occasionally eaten a man; and birds
					have tasted of human flesh through necessity; but
					no beast has ever attempted a human body for lustful
					reasons. But the beasts I have mentioned and many
					others have been victims of the violent and lawless
					lusts of man.

Though men are so vile and incontinent where
					the desires I have spoken of are concerned, they can
					be proved to be even more so in the case of essential
					desires, being here far inferior to animals in temperance. These are the desires for food and drink, in
					which we beasts always take our pleasure along with
					some sort of utility; whereas you, in your pursuit
					of pleasure rather than natural nourishment, are
					punished by many serious ailments which, welling
					up from one single source, the surfeit of your bodies,
					fill you with all manner of flatulence that is difficult
					to purge. In the first place each species of animal
					has one single food proper to it, grass or some root
					or fruit. Those that are carnivorous resort to no
					other kind of nourishment, nor do they deprive those
					weaker than themselves of sustenance; but the lion
					lets the deer, and the wolf lets the sheep, feed in its
					natural pasture. But man in his pleasures is led
					
					 
					
					astray by gluttony to everything edible ; he tries
					and tastes everything as if he had not yet come to
					recognize what is suitable and proper for him; alone
					of all creatures he is omnivorous. 
				 
 
					In the first place his eating of flesh is caused by no
					lack of means or methods, for he can always in
					season harvest and garner and gather in such a
					succession of plants and grains as will all but tire
					him out with their abundance; but driven on by
					luxurious desires and satiety with merely essential
					nourishment, he pursues illicit food, made unclean
					by the slaughter of beasts; and he does this in a
					much more cruel way than the most savage beasts
					of prey. Blood and gore and raw flesh are the proper
					diet of kite and wolf and snake; to man they are an
					appetizer. Then, too, man makes use of every kind
					of food and does not, like beasts, abstain from most
					kinds and consequently make war on a few only that
					he must have for food. In a word, nothing that flies
					or swims or moves on land has escaped your so-called
					civilized and hospitable tables.

Well, then. It is admitted that you use animals
					as appetizers to sweeten your fare. Why, therefore 
					... Animal intelligence, on the contrary, allows no
					room for useless and pointless arts; and in the case
					of essential ones, we do not make one man with constant
					
					 
					
					study cling to one department of knowledge
					and rivet him jealously to that; nor do we receive
					our arts as alien products or pay to be taught them.
					Our intelligence produces them on the spot unaided,
					as its own congenital and legitimate skills. I have
					heard that in Egypt everyone is a physician; and
					in the case of beasts each one is not only his own
					specialist in medicine, but also in the providing of
					food, in warfare and hunting as well as in self-defence
					and music, in so far as any kind of animal has a
					natural gift for it. From whom have we swine
					learned, when we are sick, to resort to rivers to catch
					crabs? Who taught tortoises to devour marjoram
					after eating the snake? And who instructed Cretan
					goats, when they are pierced by an arrow, to look
					for dittany, after eating which the arrowhead falls
					out? For if you speak the truth and say that Nature
					is their teacher, you are elevating the intelligence
					of animals to the most sovereign and wisest of first
					principles. If you do not think that it should be
					called either reason or intelligence, it is high time
					for you to cast about for some fairer and even more
					honourable term to describe it, since certainly the
					faculty that it brings to bear in action is better and
					more remarkable. It is no uninstructed or untrained
					faculty, but rather self-taught and self-sufficient - 
					and not for lack of strength. It is just because of
					the health and completeness of its native virtue that
					it is indifferent to the contributions to its intelligence
					supplied by the lore of others. Such animals, at any
					rate, as man for amusement or easy living induces to
					
					 
					
					accept instruction and training have understanding
					to grasp what they are taught even when it goes
					contrary to their physical endowment, so superior
					are their mental powers. I say nothing of puppies
					that are trained as hunters, or colts schooled to keep
					time in their gait, or crows that are taught to talk,
					or dogs, to jump through revolving hoops. In the
					theatres horses and steers go through an exact routine
					in which they lie down or dance or hold a precarious
					pose or perform movements not at all easy even for
					men ; and they remember what they have been
					taught, these exhibitions of docility which are not in
					the least useful for anything else. If you are doubtful
					that we can learn arts, then let me tell you that we
					can even teach them. When partridges are making
					their escape, they accustom their fledglings to hide
					by falling on their backs and holding a lump of earth
					over themselves with their claws. You can observe
					storks on the roof, the adults showing the art of
					flying to the young as they make their trial flights. 
					Nightingales set the example for their young to
					sing; while nestlings that are caught young and
					brought up by human care are poorer singers, as
					though they had left the care of their teacher too
					early. ... and since I have entered into this new
					body of mine, I marvel at those arguments by which
					the sophists brought me to consider all creatures
					except man irrational and senseless.

ODYSSEUS. So now, Gryllus, you are transformed.
					
					 
					
					Do you attribute reason even to the sheep
					and the ass?
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. From even these, dearest Odysseus, it
					is perfectly possible to gather that animals have a
					natural endowment of reason and intellect. For just
					as one tree is not more nor less inanimate than
					another, but they are all in the same state of insensibility, since none is endowed with soul, in the
					same way one animal would not be thought to be
					more sluggish or indocile mentally than another if
					they did not all possess reason and intellect to some
					degree - though some have a greater or less proportion than others. Please note that cases of dullness
					and stupidity in some animals are demonstrated by
					the cleverness and sharpness of others - as when you
					compare an ass and a sheep with a fox or a wolf or a
					bee. It is like comparing Polyphemus to you or that
					dunce Coroebus to your grandfather Autolycus. I
					scarcely believe that there is such a spread between
					one animal and another as there is between man and
					man in the matter of judgement and reasoning and
					memory.
				 
 
					 ODYSSEUS. But consider, Gryllus: is it not a fearful
					piece of violence to grant reason to creatures that
					have no inherent knowledge of God?
					
					 
					
				 
 
					 GRYLLUS. Then shall we deny, Odysseus, that so
					wise and remarkable a man as you had Sisyphus for
					a father?