INTRODUCTION 
 
					This popular oration, or diatribe,
 	 
 	was read by
					Plutarch in some city of Asia Minor: Volkmann
 	 
					thought Sardis, the capital of the province; Haupt 
					thought Halicarnassus; Wilamowitz Ephesus. The
					occasion is clearly the consul's yearly hearing of lawsuits from the whole province.
				 
 
					The proof that afflictions of the soul are worse than
					diseases of the body is treated in a popular and, in
					chapter 4, dramatic manner. The conclusion is lost.
				 
 
					The same subject was treated in his commonplace
					fashion by Maximus Tyrius, who shows no knowledge of Plutarch's oration, nor any relation to his
					sources; Cicero, however, at the beginning of the
					third book of the Tusculan Disputations , exhibits some
					kinship with Plutarch's argument. Siefert has twice
					elaborated his opinion that some of this work of
					
					 
					Plutarch's was drawn from the ὑπόμνημα (I should
					prefer to say ὑπομνήματα 
 ) which Plutarch used in
					writing De Tranquillitate .
				 
 
					The text is not good. The work is listed as No.
					208 in the Lamprias catalogue.

Homer, having contemplated the mortal varieties
					of animals and having compared them with each
					other in respect to their lives and habits, cried out
					that nothing is
					 
 More wretched than man,
						 
 Of all that breathes and creeps upon the earth, 
 
					awarding to man an unfortunate primacy in excess of
					evils. But as for us, as though acknowledging that
					man has won the victory in wretchedness and has
					been proclaimed the most miserable of animals, let
					us compare him with himself, dividing body and soul
					for competition of their individual miseries, a task
					not unprofitable but even quite necessary, to the
					end that we may learn whether it is through Fortune
					or through ourselves that we live more wretchedly.
					For while disease grows in the body through Nature,
					vice and depravity in the soul are first the souls
					own doing, and then its affliction. It will be no
					slight aid toward tranquillity of mind, if the worse
					condition be curable, being both lighter to bear
					and lacking intensity.

The fox in Aesop, disputing at law with the
					leopard concerning their claims to variety, when the
					leopard had shown her body with its glossy surface
					bright and spotted, and the fox's tawny skin was
					rough and unpleasant to the eye,
					 
 
 But look at me >within , sir judge, said she,
						 
 
 And you will find me fuller far than she
							 
 
 
 Of fair variety, 
 
 
 
					making manifest the versatility of her character
					which changes to many forms as necessity arises.
					Shall we, then, say in our own case, Many of your
						diseases and affections, O man, your body naturally
						produces of itself, and it receives also many that
						befall it from without; but if you lay yourself open
						on the inside, you will find a storehouse and treasury,
						as Democritus says, of all manner of evils and many
						abnormal states, which do not flow in from outside,
						but have, as it were, subterranean and earth-born
						springs, which Vice, being widely diffused and abundantly supplied with those abnormal states, causes to
						gush forth ? And if the diseases in the flesh are
					detected by the pulse and biliousness, and temperatures and sudden pains confirm their presence, but the
					evils in the soul escape the notice of most men, they
					are for this reason worse evils, since they also deprive
					the sufferer of any awareness of themselves. For
					although the reason, if sound, perceives the diseases
					
					 
					
					which affect the body, yet, being itself afflicted with
					those of the soul, it can form no judgement of its
					own afflictions, for it is affected in the very part by
					which it judges; and, of the souls diseases, one
					must account as first and greatest ignorance, which
					causes Vice beyond hope of cure to abide with most
					men, to cling to them through life, and to die with
					them. For the beginning of the riddance of disease
					is awareness which leads the ailing part to the use
					of what will relieve it; but the man who through
					disbelief in his ailment does not know what he needs,
					refuses the remedy, even if it be at hand. For it is
					true of the diseases of the body also that those are
					worse which are attended by inability to perceive the
					body's condition: lethargies, migraine, epilepsies,
					apoplexies, and those very fevers which, raising inflammation to the pitch of delirium and confounding
					consciousness, as on a musical instrument,
					 Will touch the heart-strings never touched before.

Therefore professional physicians desire, in the
					first place that a man should not be ill; and next,
					if he is ill, that he should not be unaware that he is
					ill 
 		- which is the case with all the maladies which
					affect the soul. For when men act foolishly or
					licentiously or unjustly, they do not think that they
					are doing wrong, but some even think that they are
					doing right. For although no one has ever called a
					fever health, nor consumption excellent condition, nor gout swiftness of foot, nor sallowness
					a fresh complexion, yet many call hot temper 
					
					 
					
					 manliness, and love friendship, 
 and envy
					 emulation, and cowardice caution. Again,
					while men sick in body send for a doctor, since they
					perceive whom they need to counteract their ailments, yet those that are sick in soul avoid philosophers, for they think that they are doing well in those
					very matters where they are at fault. The fact is that,
					if we follow on this line of reasoning, we maintain
					that defective eyesight is easier to bear than madness
					and gout than inflammation of the brain! For a
					man that is sick in body perceives it and calls loudly
					for a physician, and when he comes, allows him to
					anoint the eyes or open the veins; but you hear the
					maddened Agave say, not recognizing her dearest
					by reason of her affliction:
					 
 From the mountain we bring
						 
 To the palace a fresh-cut tendril,
						 
 A fortunate capture. 
 
				 
 
					It is true that one who is sick in body gives in at
					once and goes to bed and remains quiet while he is
					being cured, and if, perchance j when the fever comes
					upon him, he tosses a bit and tumbles his body about,
					one of those who sit by him will say to him gently,
					 Lie still, poor wretch, and move not from your bed,
						 
 
					and so checks and restrains him; but those who suffer
					from diseases of the soul are then most active, then
					
					 
					
					least at rest. For impulses are the beginning of
					action, and the soul's abnormal states are violent
					impulses. That is the reason why they do not allow
					the soul to be at rest, but just at the time when
					man most needs repose and silence and relaxation,
					then his fits of temper, of contentiousness, of love,
					of grief, drag him into the open air and strip him
					bare, and he is forced both to do many lawless
					things and to give tongue to many things unsuited
					to the occasion.

As, therefore, the storm that prevents a sailor
					from putting into port is more dangerous than that
					which does not allow him to sail, so those storms of
					the soul are more serious which do not allow a man
					to compose or to calm his disturbed reason; but
					pilotless and without ballast, in confusion and aimless
					wandering, rushing headlong in oblique and reeling
					courses, he suffers a terrible shipwreck, as it were,
					and ruins his life. Consequently for this reason also
					it is worse to be sick in soul than in body; for men
					afflicted in body only suffer, but those afflicted in soul
					both suffer and do ill. 
				 
 
					But why need I recount the multitude of the soul's
					maladies? The present occasion of itself brings
					them to mind. Do you see this vast and promiscuous
					crowd which jostles and surges in confusion here
					about the tribunal and the market-place? These
					persons have come together, not to sacrifice to their
					country's gods, not to share in each other's family
					rites, not bringing to Ascraean Zeus
						 the first-fruits
						
						 
						
					of Lydian harvests, 
 nor, in honour of
					Dionysus, to celebrate his mystic festival on sacred
					nights with common revellings, but, as it were, a
					mighty pestilence drives them together here with
					yearly visitations stirring up Asia, which must come
					for law-suits and litigation at certain stated times;
					and the overwhelming multitude, like streams flowing together, has inundated this one market-place
					and boils with fury and dashes together in a tumult
					 of destroyers and destroyed. 
 What fevers, what
					agues, have brought this about? What stoppages,
					or irruptions of blood, or distemperature of heat,
					or overflow of humours, have caused this? If you
					examine every law-suit, as though it were a person,
					to discover what gave rise to it and whence it came,
					you will find that obstinate anger begat one, frantic
					ambition another, unjust desire a third...