INTRODUCTION 
 
					This essay, or declamation, is clearly in an unfinished
					state throughout and a good deal is doubtless lost at
					the end, for the author has done little more with his
					subject than to show that φιλοστοργία 
 is more
					complete in man than in beasts. The efforts of
 	Döhner and Weissenberger to prove that the essay
					is not genuine have not been successful. Dohner is,
					further, quite wrong, as Patzig and Weissenberger
					have shown, in assuming the work to be an epitome.
					
					 
					
					It is best regarded as an unfinished fragment, containing, so far as it goes, the rough and unrevised
					hand of Plutarch.
				 
 
					Dyroff's attempt to show that this work was composed before De Esu Carnium , De Sollertia Animalium ,
					and Gryllus is not to be taken seriously: the grounds
					are too slight.
					The text is very corrupt. The work is not listed in
					the Lamprias catalogue.

Trials of cases on appeal 
 	before special arbitrators and the carrying of cases before foreign courts
					were first devised by the Greeks by reason of their
					mutual distrust, since they had need of the justice
					supplied by others than themselves, like any other
					non-indigenous necessity. Is it thus, then, that
					philosophers also, because of their disagreements
					with each other, refer some of their questions to the
					nature of irrational animals, as though to a foreign
					city, and submit the decision to the emotions and
					character and habits of these creatures as to a court
					that cannot be influenced or bribed? Or is this also
					a common charge against human depravity - that,
					being in doubt about the most necessary and important things, we seek among horses and dogs and
					birds how we ourselves should marry and beget and
					bring up children (as though we had no plain indication of Nature in ourselves); and that we term the
					traits which brute beasts have characters and
					 emotions, and accuse our life of a great deviation
					
					 
					
					and departure from Nature, confused and disordered
					as we are at the very beginning concerning even
					the first principles? For in dumb animals Nature
					preserves their special characteristics pure and unmixed and simple, but in men, through reason and
					habit, they have been modified by many opinions
					and adventitious judgements so that they have lost
					their proper form and have acquired a pleasing
					variety comparable to the variety of perfumes made
					by the pharmacist on the basis of a single oil. And
					let us not wonder if irrational animals follow Nature
					more closely than rational ones; for animals are, in
					fact, outdone in this by plants, to which Nature has
					given neither imagination nor impulse, nor desire for
					something different, which causes men to shake themselves free from what Nature desires; but plants, as
					though they were fastened in chains, remain in the
					power of Nature, always traversing the one path along
					which Nature leads them. Yet in wild beasts versatility of reasoning and uncommon cleverness and excessive love of freedom are not too highly developed;
					and though they have irrational impulses and desires
					and often wander about on circuitous paths, they do
					not go far afield, but ride, as it were, at the anchor
					provided by Nature, who points out to them the
					straight way, as to an ass which proceeds under bit
					and bridle. But in man ungoverned reason is absolute master, and, discovering now one way of
					deviation and innovation and now another, has left
					no clear or certain vestige of Nature visible.

Observe to what extent there exists in animals
					
					 
					
					conformity to nature in regard to their marriages.
					In the first place, they do not wait for laws against
					celibacy or late wedlock, as did the citizens of
					Lycurgus and Solon,
 	 nor fear loss of civil rights because of childlessness, nor pursue the honours of the
 ius trium liberorum 
, as many Romans do when they
					marry and beget children, not that they may have
					heirs, but that they may inherit. In the next place,
					the male does not consort with the female during all
					seasons, for the end and aim is not pleasure, but
					procreation and the begetting of offspring; therefore
					it is in the season of spring, which has procreative
					breezes and a temperature suitable to intercourse, 
					that the female, rendered submissive and desirable,
					comes to consort with the male, exulting, as she
					does, in the pleasing odour of her flesh and the
					peculiar adornment of her body, and filled with
					dew and clean grass ; but when she perceives that
					she is pregnant and sated, she modestly retires and
					takes thought for the birth and safety of her offspring.
					But it is impossible to recount the procedure in a
					manner worthy of the subject, except to say that
					each of the pair is as one in their affection for their
					offspring, in their forethought, their endurance, and
					
					 
					
					their self-control. Further, though we call the bee
					wise and believe that it
					 Makes the yellow honey its care, 
 
					flattering the saccharine quality of its sweetness
					which tickles our palates, yet we overlook the wisdom
					and artifice of the other creatures which is manifested
					in the bearing and the nurture of offspring. As, for
					example, the king-fisher after conception makes her
					nest by gathering the thorns of the sea-needle and
					interweaving and joining them together, and makes it
					round and oblong in form, like a fisherman's creel;
					and, packing the thorns closely together with the
					most exact jointure and density, submits it to the
					dashing of the waves so that, being gradually beaten
					upon and riveted together, the hard-packed surface
					may become water-proof; and it does become hard
					to divide with iron or stone. And what is more
					wonderful, the mouth of the nest is so exactly fitted
					to the size and measure of the king-fisher that no
					other creature, either larger or smaller, may enter,
					and, so they say, that it will not admit even the most
					minute drops of sea-water. 
				 
 
					And sea-dogs are a very good example, for they
					bring forth their young alive within their bodies, but
					permit their offspring to emerge and forage, and then
					take them back again and enfold them in their vitals
					and let them sleep there.
					
					 
				 
 
					And the she-bear, the most savage and sullen of
					beasts, brings forth her young formless and without
					visible joints, and with her tongue, as with a tool,
					she moulds into shape their skin ; and thus she is
					thought, not only to bear, but to fashion her cub.
				 
 
					And in Homer the lion -
					 
 Whom hunters meet leading his young within
						 
 A wood; he glares with valour and draws down
						 
 His eye-lids till they hide his eyes - 
 
					does he look like a beast that has any notion of
					making terms with the hunters for his children's
					lives? For, in general, the love of animals for their
					children makes the timid bold, the lazy energetic,
					the voracious sparing; like the bird in Homer which
					brings to her nestlings
					 
 Whatever morsels she can catch, though she
						 
 Fares ill herself, 
 
					for she feeds her young at the cost of her own hunger,
					and, though she has laid hold of food for her belly, she
					withholds it and presses it tightly with her beak, lest
					she gulp it down unawares; or
					 
 As a bitch bestrides her tender pups, and barks
						 
 At one she does not know, and longs to fight, 
 
 
					acquiring, as it were, a second courage in her fear for
					her young.
				 
 
					And partridges, when, accompanied by their
					
					 
					
					young, they are being pursued, allow the fledglings to
					fly ahead and attempt to escape, and contrive to fix
					the hunter's attention on themselves by wheeling
					close and, when they are almost captured, fly off and
					away, then again remain at rest and place themselves
					within the reach of the hunter's hope, until, by so
					exposing themselves to danger for their nestlings'
					safety, they have led on the hunters to a considerable
					distance.
				 
 
					And we have before our eyes every day the manner
					in which hens care for their brood, drooping their
					wings for some to creep under, and receiving with
					joyous and affectionate clucks others that mount
					upon their backs or run up to them from every direction; and though they flee from dogs and snakes
					if they are frightened only for themselves, if their
					fright is for their children, they stand their ground
					and fight it out beyond their strength.
				 
 
					Are we, then, to believe that Nature has implanted
					these emotions in these creatures because she is
					solicitous for the offspring of hens and dogs and bears,
					and not, rather, because she is striving to make us
					ashamed and to wound us, when we reflect that these
					instances are examples to those of us who would follow
					the lead of Nature, but to those who are callous, as
					rebukes for their insensibility, by citing which they 
					disparage human nature as being the only kind that
					has no disinterested affection and that does not know
					how to love without prospect of gain? In our theatres,
					indeed, people applaud the verse of the poet who
					said, 
					 What man will love his fellow-man for pay? 
					
					 
					
					And yet, according to Epicurus, it is for pay that
					a father loves his son, a mother her child, children
					their parents; but if beasts could come to understand
					speech and someone should bring together to a
					common theatre horses and cows and dogs and birds
					and should revise this speech and say, Dogs do not
						love their pups, nor horses their colts, nor birds their
						nestlings, for pay, but gratuitously and naturally, it
					would be recognized by the emotions of them all that
					this was well and truly spoken. For it is shameful -
					great Heaven! - that the begetting and the pains of
					travail and the nurture of beas ts should be Nature 
					and a free gift, but that those of men should be
					loans and wages and caution-money, all given on
					condition of a return!

But such a statement is neither true nor worth
					the hearing. For just as in uncultivated plants,
					such as wild vines and figs and olives, Nature has
					implanted the principles, though crude and imperfect,
					of cultivated fruits, so on irrational animals she has
					bestowed a love of offspring, though imperfect and
					insufficient as regards the sense of justice and one
					which does not advance beyond utility; but in the
					case of man, a rational and social animal, Nature, by
					introducing him to a conception of justice and law and
					to the worship of the gods and to the founding of cities
					and to human kindness, has furnished noble and beautiful and fruitful seeds of all these in the joy we have
					in our children and our love of them, emotions which
					accompany their first beginnings; and these qualities
					are found in the very constitution of their bodies. For
					although Nature is everywhere exact and workmanlike
					
					 
					
					with no deficiency or superfluity, and has, as
					Erasistratus said, no trumpery about her ; yet
					when it comes to the processes of procreation, it is
					impossible to describe them in a fitting manner, and
					perhaps it would not be decent to fix our attention
					too precisely upon the names and designations of
					these forbidden topics, but it is proper that we should
					apprehend the admirable adaptation of those hidden
					and concealed parts to the functions of procreation
					and bringing to birth. However, the production and
					administering of milk is sufficient proof of Nature's
					foresight and care. For in women the amount of
					blood exceeds the use for it because of the sluggishness and paucity of their breath and, coming to the
					surface, wanders at large and burdens them; at other
					times it is Nature's custom and care to discharge the
					blood at monthly periods by opening canals and
					channels for it, to lighten and cleanse the rest of
					the body and in season to render the womb fertile
					ground for ploughing, as it were, and sowing. But
					when the womb receives the seed as it encounters it
					and enfolds it and it has taken root there ( for the
						umbilical cord grows at first in the womb, as
					Democritus says, as an anchorage against the
						swell and drift, a cable and vine for the fruit now
					conceived that is to be), Nature shuts the monthly
					
					 
					
					canals of purification and, taking the drifting blood,
					uses it for nourishment and irrigates the embryo,
 	 
					which already is beginning to be formed and shaped,
					until, having been carried the number of months
					proper to its growth within the womb, it needs other
					nourishment and abiding-place. At that time, then,
					Nature, more carefully than any gardener or irrigator,
					turns and changes the blood from one use to another
					and has in readiness subterranean springs, as it were,
					of a fresh-flowing stream; and the springs receive
					the blood in no perfunctory or unemotional manner,
					but are even able, by the gentle heat and soft
					womanliness of respiration, to digest, mollify, and
					change it; for such a disposition and temper does the
					breast have within it. Yet there are no outflowing
					streams of milk nor spouts which discharge it all
					at once, but the breast terminates in flesh that
					is full of springs and can filter the milk gently
					through minute passage-ways; and it thus gives a
					store of food that is comfortable for the infant's
					mouth and pleasant for it to touch and to grasp.
				 
 
					But there would be no benefit in these many kinds
					of equipment for procreation, or in such ways and
					means, such zeal and forethought, if Nature had not
					implanted in mothers affection and care for their
					offspring.
					 
 There is nothing more wretched than a man, 
						 
 Of all that breathes and creeps upon the earth - 
 
					the poet tells no falsehood if it is about a new-born
					
					 
					
					babe that he speaks. For there is nothing so imperfect, so helpless, so naked, so shapeless, so foul, as
					man observed at birth, to whom alone, one might
					almost say, Nature has given not even a clean passage
					to the light ; but, defiled with blood and covered
					with filth and resembling more one just slain than one
					just born, he is an object for none to touch or lift up
					or kiss or embrace except for someone who loves with
					a natural affection. Therefore, while the other animals
					have their dugs hanging loose beneath the belly, in
					women they grow above on the breast where mothers
					can kiss and embrace and fondle the infant, the
					inference being that the end and aim of bearing and
					rearing a child is not utility, but affection.

Carry the discussion back to primitive mankind,
					to those whose women were the first to bear, and
					whose men were the first to see a child born; they had
					neither any law which bade them rear their children,
					nor any expectation of gratitude or of receiving
					the wages of maintenance lent to their children
						when they were young. 
 Nay, I should rather be
					inclined to affirm that these mothers were hostile and
					malicious toward their children, since great dangers
					and travail had come to them from child-birth:
					 
 As when a sharp pang pierces a woman in labour,
						 
 A pang which the Eileithyiae of child-bed send,
						 
 The daughters of Hera, who bring the bitter pangs - 
 
					these lines, women tell us, were written, not by
					Homer, but by an Homerid after child-birth or
					
					 
					
					while she was still in the throes of it and had the
					pain of travail, alike bitter and sharp, actually present
					in her entrails. But even then the affection for offspring implanted by Nature would bend and lead the
					mother: still hot and suffering and shaken with her
					pangs, she did not neglect or avoid her child, but
					turned to it and smiled at it and took it up and kissed
					it, though she reaped nothing sweet or profitable
					therefrom, but received it with pain and suffering,
					and with tatters of swaddling-clothes
					 Thus warming and caressing it, both night
						And day she passes in alternate toil.
						 
 
					For what pay or advantage were these services performed by those ancient parents? Nor is there
					any for those of our day, since their expectations
					are uncertain and far off. He that plants a vineyard
					in the vernal equinox gathers the grapes in the autumnal; he that sows wheat when the Pleiades set
					reaps it when they rise; cattle and horses and
					birds bring forth young at once ready for use;
					but as for man, his rearing is full of trouble, his
					growth is slow, his attainment of excellence is far
					distant and most fathers die before it comes. Neocles
					did not live to see the Salamis of Themistocles
					nor Miltiades the Eurymedon of Cimon; nor did
					Xanthippus ever hear Pericles harangue the people,
					nor did Ariston hear Plato expound philosophy;
					nor did the fathers of Euripides and Sophocles come
					to know their sons' victories; they but heard them
					
					 
					
					lisping and learning to speak and witnessed their
					revellings and drinking-bouts and love-affairs, as they
					indulged in such follies as young men commit; so
					that of all Evenus wrote the only line that is
					praised or remembered is
					 For fathers a child is always fear or pain. 
					Yet none the less fathers do not cease rearing children
					and, most of all, those who least need them. For it is
					ridiculous if anyone thinks that the rich sacrifice and
					rejoice when sons are born to them because they will
					have someone to support them and bury them-unless,
					by Heaven, it is for lack of heirs that they bring
					up children, since it is impossible to find or happen
					upon anyone willing to accept another's property!
					 
 Not sand or dust or feathers of birds of varied note
						 
 Could heap up so great a number 
 
 
					as is the number of those seeking inheritances. 
					 The sire of fifty daughters, Danaüs; 
					but if he had been childless, he would have had more
					heirs, and heirs unlike his own. For sons feel no
					gratitude, nor, for the sake of inheriting, do they pay
					court or show honour, knowing that they receive the
					inheritance as their due. But you hear the words of
					
					 
					
					strangers clustering around the childless man, like
					those famous verses of the comic poet, 
					 O Demos, judge one case, then to your bath;
						Gorge, guzzle, stuff, and take three obols' pay. 
					And the remark of Euripides, 
					 
 Money it is that finds out friends for men
						 
 And holds the greatest power among mankind, 
 
					is not a simple and general truth, but applies to the
					childless: it is these whom rich men feast, whom
					great men court, for these alone do advocates plead
					gratis.
					 A rich man with an unknown heir's a power. 
 
					Many, at any rate, who had many friends and much
					honour, the birth of one child has made friendless
					and powerless. Therefore not even toward the
					acquisition of power is there any aid to be derived
					from children, but the whole force of Nature exists
					no less in man than in beasts.

Now both this and miny other excellences are
					obscured by vice, as a thicket springs up beside seeds
					planted in a garden. Or are we to say that man has
					no natural love for himself just because many men
					cut their throats or hurl themselves from precipices?
					And Oedipus 
					 
 Smote his eyes with a brooch and at each blow
						 
 The bloody eye-balls wet his beard; 
 
					
					 
					
					and Hegesias by the eloquence of his reasoning
					persuaded many of his hearers to starve themselves
					to death.
					 In many a guise the gods appear. 
 
				 
 
					But these are like those diseases and morbid
					states of the soul which drive men from their natural
					condition, as they themselves testify against themselves. For if a sow tears to pieces her suckling pig,
					or a bitch her puppy, men grow despondent and
					disturbed and offer to the gods sacrifices to avert the
					evil, and consider it a portent on the ground that
					Nature prescribes to all creatures that they should
					love and rear their offspring, not destroy them.
					Moreover, as in mines the gold, though mingled and
					covered with much earth, yet gleams through, so
					Nature, even in characters and passions which are
					themselves perverted, reveals their love for their offspring. For when poor men do not rear their children
					it is because they fear that if they are educated less
					well than is befitting they will become servile
					and boorish and destitute of all the virtues; since
					they consider poverty the worst of evils, they
					cannot endure to let their children share it with
					them, as though it were a kind of disease, serious
					and grievous....