INTRODUCTION 
 
					This charming essay, by far the best in the volume,
					suffers from only one defect, its length. Though
					Plutarch again and again, by his narrative skill and
					naïve or unconscious humour, will delight even those
					who have hardened their hearts against him (I mean
					his editors), he cannot at last resist the temptation to
					indulge in what he considered scientific analysis and
					enlightened exhortation. He is then merely dull.
					But, taken as a whole, the essay is surely a success,
					and as organic and skilful a performance as any in
					the Moralia .
				 
 
					The work was written after De Curiositate and
					before De Tranquillitate , De Capienda ex Inimicis
						Utilitate , and De Laude Ipsius .
 	 It stands in the
					Lamprias catalogue as No. 92.

It is a troublesome and difficult task that philosophy has in hand when it undertakes to cure garrulousness. For the remedy, words of reason, requires listeners; but the garrulous listen to nobody,
					for they are always talking. And this is the first
					symptom of their ailment: looseness of the tongue
					becomes impotence of the ears. For it is a deliberate
					deafness, that of men who, I take it, blame Nature
					because they have only one tongue, but two ears.b
					If, then, Euripides 
 		was right when he said with
					reference to the unintelligent hearer,
					 
 I could not fill a man who will not hold
						 
 My wise words flooding into unwise ears, 
 
					it would be more just to say to the garrulous man,
					or rather about the garrulous man,
					 
 I could not fill a man who will not take
						 
 My wise words flooding into unwise ears, 
 
					or rather submerging, a man who talks to those
					
					 
					
					who will not listen, and will not listen when others
					talk. For even if he does listen for a moment, when
					his loquacity is, as it were, at ebb, the rising tide
					immediately makes up for it many times over.
				 
 
					They give the name of Seven-voiced to the
					portico at Olympia which reverberates many times
					from a single utterance; and if but the least word
					sets garrulousness in motion, straightway it echoes
					round about on all sides,
					 Touching the heart-strings never touched before. 
 
					Indeed one might think that babbler's ears have no
					passage bored through to the soul, but only to the
					tongue. 
 	Consequently, while others retain what is
					said, in talkative persons it goes right through in a
					flux; then they go about like empty vessels, void
					of sense, but full of noise.

But if, however, we are resolved to leave no
					means untried, let us say to the babbler,
					 Hush, child: in silence many virtues lie, 
 
					and among them the two first and greatest, the
					merits of hearing and being heard; neither of these
					can happen to talkative persons, but even in that
					which they desire especially they fail miserably. For
					in other diseases of the soul, such as love of money,
					love of glory, love of pleasure, there is at least the
					possibility of attaining their desires, but for babblers
					this is very difficult: they desire listeners and cannot
					
					 
					
					get them, since every one runs away headlong. If
					men are sitting in a public lounge or strolling about
					in a portico, and see a talker coming up, they
					quickly give each other the counter-sign to break
					camp. And just as when silence occurs in an assemblage they say that Hermes has joined the company,
					so when a chatterbox comes into a dinner-party or
					social gathering, every one grows silent, not wishing
					to furnish him a hold; and if he begins of his own
					accord to open his mouth,
					 As when the North-wind blows along
						A sea-beaten headland before the storm, 
 
					suspecting that they will be tossed about and sea-sick,
					they rise up and go out. And so it is a talker's lot
					when travelling by land or sea, to find volunteer
					listeners neither as table-companions nor as tentmates, but only conscripts; for the talker is at
					you everywhere, catching your cloak, plucking your
					beard, digging you in the ribs.
					 Then are your feet of the greatest value, 
					as Archilochus 
 		says, and on my word the wise Aristotle will agree. 
 		For when Aristotle himself was
					annoyed by a chatterer and bored with some silly
					stories, and the fellow kept repeating, Isn't it
						wonderful, Aristotle? 
 There's nothing wonderful about that, said Aristotle, but that anyone with
							feet endures you. To another man of the same
					sort, who said after a long rigmarole, Poor philosopher, I've wearied you with my talk, 
 Heavens,
						no! said Aristotle, I wasn't listening. In fact,
					
					 
					
					if chatterers force their talk upon us, the soul surrenders to them the ears to be flooded from outside,
					but herself within unrolls thoughts of another sort and
					follows them out by herself. Therefore talkers do
					not find it easy to secure listeners who either pay
					attention or believe what they say; for just as they
					affirm that the seed of persons too prone to lusts
					of the flesh is barren, so is the speech of babblers
					ineffectual and fruitless.

And yet Nature has built about none of our
					parts so stout a stockade as about the tongue, having
					placed before it as an outpost the teeth, so that when
					reason within tightens the reins of silence, 
 if
					the tongue does not obey or restrain itself, we may
					check its incontinence by biting it till it bleeds. For
					Euripides says that disaster is the end, not of
					unbolted treasuries or storerooms, but of unbridled
						tongues. And those who believe that storerooms
					without doors and purses without fastenings are of
					no use to their owners, yet keep their mouths without lock or door, maintaining as perpetual an outflow
					as the mouth of the Black Sea, appear to regard
					speech as the least valuable of all things. They do
					not, therefore, meet with belief, which is the object
					of all speech. For this is the proper end and aim
					of speech, to engender belief in the hearer; but
					chatterers are disbelieved even if they are telling the
					truth. For as wheat shut up in a jar is found to
					have increased in quantity, but to have deteriorated
					
					 
					
					in quality, so when a story finds its way to a chatterer,
					it generates a large addition of falsehood and thereby
					destroys its credit.

Again, every self-respecting and orderly man
					would, I think, avoid drunkenness. For while, according to some, anger lives next door to madness, 
					drunkenness lives in the same house with it; or
					rather, drunkenness is madness, shorter in duration,
					but more culpable, because the will also is involved
					in it. And there is no fault so generally ascribed to
					drunkenness as that of intemperate and unlimited
					speech. For wine, says the Poet, 
					 
 Urges a man to sing, though he be wise,
						 
 And stirs to merry laughter and the dance. 
 
					And what is here so very dreadful? Singing and
					laughing and dancing? Nothing so far-
					 But it lets slip some word better unsaid : 
					this is where the dreadful and dangerous part now
					comes in. And perhaps the Poet has here resolved
					the question debated by the philosophers, the
					difference between being under the influence of
					wine and being drunk, when he speaks of the former
					as relaxation, but drunkenness as sheer folly. For
					what is in a man's heart when he is sober is on his
					tongue when he is drunk, as those who are given to
					proverbs say. Therefore when Bias kept silent at a
					
					 
					
					drinking-bout and was taunted with stupidity by a
					chatterer, What fool, said he, in his cups can
						hold his tongue? And when a certain man at
					Athens was entertaining envoys from the king, at
					their earnest request he made every effort to gather
					the philosophers to meet them; and while the rest
					took part in the general conversation and made
					their contributions to it, but Zeno kept silent,
					the strangers, pledging him courteously, said, And
						what are we to tell the king about you, Zeno? 
					 Nothing, said he, except that there is an old
						man at Athens who can hold his tongue at a drinking-party. 
				 
 
					Thus silence is something profound and awesome
					and sober, but drunkenness is a babbler, for it is
					foolish and witless, and therefore loquacious also.
					And the philosophers even in their very definition
					of drunkenness say that it is intoxicated and foolish
					talking; thus drinking is not blamed if silence attends
					the drinking, but it is foolish talk which converts the
					influence of wine into drunkenness. While it is true
					that the drunken man talks foolishness in his cups,
					the chatterer talks foolishness on all occasions, in the
					market-place, in the theatre, out walking, drunk or
					sober, by day, by night. As your physician, he is
					worse than the disease; as your ship-mate, more
					unpleasant than sea-sickness; his praises are more
					annoying than another's blame: we certainly have
					greater pleasure in company with clever rascals than
					with honest chatterboxes. In Sophocles, when Ajax
					
					 
					
					uses boisterous language, Nestor, in soothing him,
					says in words which show his knowledge of character,
					 I blame you not: ill your words, but good your deeds. 
					But these are not our feelings toward the chatterer;
					on the contrary, the untimeliness of his words destroys and annuls all gratitude for any deed.

Lysias once composed a speech for a litigant and
					gave it to him. The man read it through a number
					of times and came to Lysias in despair and said that
					the first time he read it the speech seemed to him
					wonderfully good, but on taking it up a second and
					third time it appeared completely dull and ineffectual.
					 Well, said Lysias laughing, isn't it only once that
						you are going to speak it before the jurors? And
					consider the persuasiveness and charm of Lysias!
					For he is one who, for my part,
					 I say has a fair portion in the violet-tressed Muses. 
 
					And of the things said about the Poet this is the
					truest - that Homer alone has survived the fastidiousness of men, since he is ever new and his charm is
					ever at its best; yet none the less, he spoke and proclaimed that famous remark about himself,
					 
 I scorn to tell
						 
 A tale again that's once been clearly told ; 
 
					and he avoids and fears the satiety which lies in
					
					 
					
					ambush for every tale, leading his hearers from one
					narrative to another and soothing away the ear's
					surfeit by constant novelty. But babblers actually
					wear out our ears by their repetitions, just as though
					they were smudging palimpsests.

Let this, then, be the first thing of which we
					remind them - that just as wine, discovered for the
					promotion of pleasure and good fellowship, is sometimes misused to produce discomfort and intoxication
					by those who compel others to drink it undiluted
					in large quantities, so speech, which is the most
					pleasant and human of social ties, is made inhuman
					and unsocial by those who use it badly and wantonly,
					because they offend those whom they think they
					please, are ridiculed for their attempts at gaining
					admiration, and are disliked because of the very
					means they employ to gain affection. As, then, he
					can have no share in Aphrodite who uses her girdle
					to drive away and alienate those who seek his company, so he who arouses annoyance and hostility with
					his speech is no friend of the Muses and a stranger
					to art.

Now of the other affections and maladies some
					are dangerous, some detestable, some ridiculous; but
					garrulousness has all these qualities at once; for
					babblers are derided for telling what everyone knows,
					they are hated for bearing bad news, they run into
					danger since they cannot refrain from revealing
					secrets. So it is that Anacharsis, when he had been
					entertained and feasted at Solons house and lay
					down to sleep, was seen to have his left hand placed
					
					 
					
					upon his private parts, but his right hand upon his
					mouth; for he believed, quite rightly, that the
					tongue needs the stronger restraint. It would not
					be easy, for example, to enumerate as many men
					who have been ruined by incontinent lust as is the
					number of cities and empires which a secret revealed
					has brought to destruction. When Sulla was besieging Athens, he had very little time to waste in the
					operations
					 Since other labour was pressing, 
 
					Mithridates having ravaged Asia, and the party of
					Marius being again masters in Rome. But spies
					heard some old men in a barber's shop remarking to
					each other that the Heptachalcon was unguarded
					and that the city was in danger of being captured at
					that point; and the spies brought word of this to
					Sulla, who at once brought up his forces at midnight,
					led in his army, and almost razed the city to the
					ground, filling it with carnage and corpses so that the
					Cerameicus ran with blood. And Sulla's anger with
					the Athenians was due more to their words than to
					their deeds; for they used to revile him and
					Metella, leaping upon the walls and jesting,
					 Sulla is a mulberry sprinkled with meal ; 
					and with much similar idle banter they drew upon
					themselves, as Plato says, a very heavy penalty
						for the lightest of things, words. 
					
					 
				 
 
					The loquacity of one man, again, prevented Rome
					from becoming free by the removal of Nero. For
					but one night remained, after which the tyrant was
					to die, and all preparations had been made; but the
					man who was to kill him saw at the palace gates
					when on his way to the theatre a prisoner about to
					be led before Nero and lamenting his evil fortune.
					He approached the prisoner and whispered to him,
					 Only pray, my good man, that to-day may pass by
						and to-morrow you will be thankful to me. So the
					prisoner grasped the intended meaning, and reflecting, I suppose, that
					 
 He is a fool who leaves things close at hand
						 
 To follow what is out of reach, 
 
 
					chose the surer rather than the more just way of
					safety. For he revealed to Nero what had been said
					to him by the man, who was immediately seized, and
					tortures and fire and the lash were applied to the
					conspirator as he denied, in the face of constraint,
					what he had revealed without constraint.

Zeno the philosopher, in order that even
					against his will no secret should be betrayed by his
					body when under torture, bit his tongue through and
					spat it out at the despot. And Leaena also has
					a splendid reward for her self-control. She was a
					courtesan belonging to the group led by Harmodius
					and Aristogeiton and shared in the conspiracy against
					
					 
					
					the tyrants - with her hopes, all a woman could do;
					for she also had joined in the revels about that noble
					mixing-bowl of Eros and through the god had been
					initiated into the secrets which might not be revealed.
					When, therefore, the conspirators failed and were put
					to death, she was questioned and commanded to
					reveal those who still escaped detection; but she
					would not do so and continued steadfast, proving that
					those men had experienced a passion not unworthy of
					themselves in loving a woman like her. And the
					Athenians caused a bronze lioness without a tongue
					to be made and set it up in the gates of the Acropolis,
					representing by the spirited courage of the animal
					Leaena's invincible character, and by its tonguelessness her power of silence in keeping a holy secret.
				 
 
					No spoken word, it is true, has ever done such
					service as have in many instances words unspoken ;
					for it is possible at some later time to tell what you
					have kept silent, but never to keep silent what once
					has been spoken - that has been spilled, and has
					made its way abroad. Hence, I think, in speaking
					we have men as teachers, but in keeping silent we
					have gods, and we receive from them this lesson of
					silence at initiations into the Mysteries. And the
					Poet f has made the most eloquent Odysseus the
					most reticent, and also his son and his wife and his
					nurse; for you hear the nurse saying, 
					 I'll hold it safe like sturdy oak or iron. 
					
					 
					
					And Odysseus himself, as he sat beside Penelope,
					 
 Did pity in his heart his wife in tears,
						 
 But kept his eyes firm-fixed within their lids
						 
 Like horn or iron. 
 
 
					So full of self-control was his body in every limb, and
					Reason, with all parts in perfect obedience and submission, ordered his eyes not to weep, his tongue not
					to utter a sound, his heart not to tremble or bark :
					 His heart remained enduring in obedience, 
 
					since his reason extended even to his irrational or involuntary movements and made amenable and subservient to itself
 	 both his breath and his blood. Of
					such character were also most of his companions; for
					even when they were dragged about and dashed
					upon the ground by the Cyclops, they would not
					denounce Odysseus nor show that fire-sharpened
					instrument prepared against the monster's eye, but
					preferred to be eaten raw rather than to tell a
					single word of the secret-an example of self-control
					and loyalty which cannot be surpassed. Therefore
					Pittacus did not do badly, when the king of Egypt
					sent bini a sacrificial animal and bade him cut out
					the fairest and foulest meat, when he cut out and
					sent him the tongue, as being the instrument of both
					the greatest good and the greatest evil.

And Ino in Euripides, speaking out boldly
					concerning herself, says that she knows how to be
					 Silent in season, to speak where speech is safe. 
					For those who have received a noble and truly royal
					education learn first to be silent, and then to speak.
					For example, that famous king Antigonus, when his
					son asked him at what hour they were to break camp,
					said, What are you afraid of? That you alone may
						not hear the trumpet? This was not, surely, because he would not entrust a secret to the man to
					whom he intended to leave his kingdom? No, he was
					teaching his son to be self-controlled and guarded
					about such matters. And the old Metellus, when
					on a campaign he was asked some such question, said,
					 If I thought my shirt was privy to that secret, I
						would have stripped it off and put it in the fire. And
					Eumenes, 
 		when he heard that Cr at erus was advancing, told none of his friends, but pretended that it was
					Neoptolemi. For his soldiers despised Neoptolemus,
					but both respected the reputation of Craterus and
					admired his valour. No one else knew the truth, and
					they joined battle, won the victory, killed Craterus
					without knowing it, and only recognized him when he
					was dead. So successfully did silence manoeuvre the
					contest and keep hidden so formidable an opponent
					that his friends admired Eumenes for not forewarning
					them rather than blamed him. And even if some do
					blame you, it is better that men should criticize you
					when they are already saved through mistrust than
					
					 
					
					that they should accuse you when they are being
					destroyed because you did trust them.

Yet, speaking generally, who has left himself
					the right to speak out boldly against one who has not
					kept silent? If the story ought not to have been
					known, it was wrong for it to be told to another;
					and if you have let the secret slip from yourself and
					yet seek to confine it to another, you have taken
					refuge in another's good faith when you have already
					abandoned your own. And if he turns out to be no
					better than yourself, you are deservedly ruined; if
					better, you are saved beyond all expectation, since
					you have found another more faithful on your own
					behalf than you yourself are. But this man is my
						friend. Yet he has another friend, whom he will
					likewise trust as I trust him; and his friend, again,
					will trust another friend. Thus, then, the story goes
					on increasing and multiplying by link after link of incontinent betrayal. For just as the monad does not
					pass out of its own boundaries, but remains once and
					for all one (for which reason it is called a monad), and
					as the dyad is the indeterminate beginning of difference (for by doubling it at once shifts from unity to
					plurality), so a story confined to its first possessor is
					truly secret; but if it passes to another, it has acquired the status of rumour. The Poet, in fact, says
					that words are winged : neither when you let
					go from your hands a winged thing is it easy to get
					
					 
					
					it back again, nor when a word is let slip from the
					mouth is it possible to arrest and control it, but it is
					borne away
					 Circling on swift wings, 
 
					and is scattered abroad from one to another. So
					when a ship has been caught by a wind, they try to
					check it, deadening its speed with cables and anchors,
					but if a story runs out of harbour, so to speak, there
					is no roadstead or anchorage for it, but, carried away
					with a great noise and reverberation, it dashes upon
					the man who uttered it and submerges him in some
					great and terrible danger.
					 
 With but a little torch one might set fire
						 
 To Ida's rock; and tell one man a tale,
						 
 Soon all the town will know.

The Roman Senate was once for many days
					debating in strict privacy a certain secret policy; and
					since the matter gave rise to much uncertainty and
					suspicion, a woman prudent in other respects, but yet
					a woman, kept pestering her husband and persistently
					begging to learn the secret. She vowed with imprecations upon herself that she would keep silent,
					and wept and moaned because she was not trusted.
					And the Roman, wishing to bring home her folly
					by proof, said, Wife, you have won; listen to
						a terrible and portentous matter. We have been
						informed by the priests that a lark has been seen
						flying about with a golden helmet and a spear; we
						
						 
						
						are therefore examining the portent whether it be
						good or bad, and are in constant consultation with the
						augurs. But do you hold your tongue. So saying
					he went off to the Forum. But his wife at once
					seized the first maid to come into the room and beat
					her own breast and tore her hair. Alas, she cried,
					 for my husband and my country! What will become of us? wishing, and in fact instructing, the
					maid to ask, Why, what has happened? So when
					the maid asked the question, she told the tale and
					added that refrain common to every babbler, Keep
						this quiet and tell it to no one! The little maid
					had scarcely left her when she herself tells the tale
					to that fellow servant who, she saw,had least to do;
					and this servant, in turn, told it to her lover who was
					paying a visit. WTith such speed was the story rolled
					out 
 		into the Forum that it preceded its inventor:
					he was met by an acquaintance who said, Have
						you just now come down to the Forum from home? 
					 This very moment, said he. Then you have
						heard nothing? 
 Why, is there any news? 
					 A lark has been seen flying about with a gold
						helmet and a spear and the magistrates are going
						to convene the senate about the matter. And the
					husband laughed and said, All praise to your speed,
						my wife! The story has even reached the Forum
						before me! So he interviewed the magistrates and
					relieved them of their anxiety; but, by way of punishing his wife, as soon as he entered home, he said,
					 Wife, you have ruined me! The secret has been
						discovered to have been made public from my house;
						consequently I am to be exiled from my native land
						because you lack self-control. When she denied it
					
					 
					
					and said, What, didn't you hear it in company with
						three hundred others? 
 Three hundred, nonsense! said he. You made such a fuss that I
							had to invent the whole story to try you out. Thus
					this man made trial of his wife cautiously and in complete safety, pouring, as it were into a leaky vessel,
					not wine or oil, but water. 
				 
 
					But Fuivius, the friend of Caesar Augustus, heard
					the emperor, now an old man, lamenting the desolation of his house: two of his grandsons were dead,
					and Postumius, the only one surviving, was in exile
					because of some false accusation, and thus he was
					forced to import his wife's son into the imperial
					succession; yet he pitied his grandson and was
					planning to recall him from abroad. Fulvius divulged
					what he had heard to his own wife, and she to Livia;
					and Livia bitterly rebuked Caesar: if he had formed
					this design long ago, why did he not send for his
					grandson, instead of making her an object of enmity
					and strife to the successor to the empire. Accordingly, when Fulvius came to him in the morning, as
					was his custom, and said, Hail, Caesar, Caesar
					replied, Farewell, Fulvius. 
 And Fulvius took
					his meaning and went away; going home at once,
					he sent for his wife, Caesar has found out, he
					said, that I have not kept his secret, and therefore
						
						 
						
						I intend to kill myself. 
 It is right that you
							should, said his wife, since, after living with me
								for so long a time, you have not learned to guard
								against my incontinent tongue. But let me die first. 
					And, taking the sword, she dispatched herself before
					her husband.

Philippides, the comic poet, therefore, made
					the right answer when King Lysimachus courteously
					asked him, What is there of mine that I may share
						with you? and he replied, Anything you like,
							Sire, except your secrets. And to garrulousness
					is attached also a vice no less serious than itself,
					inquisitiveness. For babblers wish to hear many
					things so that they may have many things to tell.
					And they go about tracking down and searching out
					especially those stories that have been kept hidden
					and are not to be revealed, storing up for their foolish
					gossip, as it were, a second-hand stock of hucksters'
					wares; then, like children with a piece of ice, they
					are neither able to hold it nor willing to let it go.
					Or rather, the secrets are like reptiles which they
					catch and place in their bosoms, yet cannot confine
					them there, but are devoured by them; for pipefish and vipers, they say, burst in giving birth, and
					secrets, when they escape, destroy and ruin those
					who cannot keep them.
				 
 
					Seleucus the Victorious lost his entire army and
					power in the battle against the Gauls; he tore off his
					
					 
					
					crown with his own hands and fled on horseback with
					three or four companions. When he had travelled
					a long journey through winding ways and trackless
					wilds, at length becoming desperate from lack of food
					he approached a certain farmhouse. By chance he
					found the master himself and begged bread and
					water from him. And the farmer gave him lavishly
					both these and whatever else there was in a farmstead,
					and, while entertaining him hospitably, recognized
					the face of the king. In his joy at the fortunate
					chance of rendering service he could not restrain
					himself or dissemble as did the king, who wished to
					remain unknown, but he escorted the king to the
					highway and, on taking leave, said, Fare well,
						King Seleucus. And Seleucus, stretching out his
					right hand to him and drawing him towards himself
					as though to kiss him, gave a sign to one of his
					companions to cut off the man's head with a sword s
					 Still speaking his head was mingled with the dust. 
 
					But if the man had remained silent at that time and
					had mastered himself for a little while, when the king
					later won success and regained power, he would
					have earned, I fancy, an even larger reward for his
					silence than for his hospitality.
				 
 
					This man, it is true, had as something of an excuse
					for his incontinence his hopes and the friendly service
					he had rendered;

but most talkers do not even
					have a reason for destroying themselves. For example, people were once talking in a barber's shop
					about how adamantine and unbreakable the despotism of Dionysius was. The barber laughed and said,
					 Fancy your saying that about Dionysius, when I
						
						 
						
						have my razor at his throat every few days or so! 
					When Dionysius heard this, he crucified the barber.
				 
 
					It is not strange that barbers are a talkative clan,
					for the greatest chatterboxes stream in and sit in
					their chairs, so that they are themselves infected
					with the habit. It was a witty answer, for instance,
					that King Archelaü;s gave to a loquacious barber,
					who, as he wrapped his towel around him, asked,
					 How shall I cut your hair, Sire? 
 In silence, 
					said Archelaüs. And it was a barber also who first
					announced the great disaster of the Athenians in
					Sicily, having learned it in the Peiraeus from a slave,
					one of those who had escaped from the island. Then
					the barber left his shop and hurried at full speed to
					the city,
					 Lest another might win the glory 
					of imparting the news to the city,
					 and he come second. 
 
					A panic naturally arose and the people gathered in
					assembly and tried to come at the origin of the
					rumour. So the barber was brought forward and
					questioned; yet he did not even know the name of
					his informant, but referred the origin to a nameless
					and unknown person. The assembly was enraged
					and cried out, Torture the cursed fellow! Put him
						on the rack! He has fabricated and concocted this
						tale! Who else heard it? Who believed it? The
					wheel was brought and the man was stretched upon
					it. Meanwhile there arrived bearers of the disastrous
					
					 
					
					news, men who had escaped from the slaughter
					itself. All, therefore, dispersed, each to his private
					mourning, leaving the wretched fellow bound on the
					wheel. But when he was set free late in the day
					when it was already nearly evening, he asked the
					executioner if they had also heard how the general,
						Nicias, had died. Such an unconquerable and
					incorrigible evil does habit make garrulity.

And yet, just as those who have drunk bitter
					and evil-smelling drugs are disgusted with the cups
					as well, so those who bear ill tidings cause disgust and
					hatred in those who hear them. Therefore Sophocles 
					has very neatly raised the question:
					 
 
 Gu. Is it in ear or soul that you are stung?-
						 
 
 Cr. But why seek to define where lies my pain?-
						 
 
 Gu. The doer grieves your heart, I but your ears. 
 
					Be that as it may, speakers also cause pain, just as
					doers do, but none the less there is no checking or
					chastening a loose tongue.
				 
 
					The temple of Athena of the Brazen House at
					Sparta was discovered to have been plundered, and
					an empty flask was found lying inside. The large
					crowd which had quickly formed was quite at a loss,
					when one of the bystanders said, If you wish, I shall
						tell you what occurs to me about that flask. I think
						that the robbers, before undertaking so dangerous a
						task, drank hemlock and brought along wine, so that,
						if they should escape detection, by drinking the unmixed wine they might quench the poison and rid
						themselves of its evil effects, and so might get away
						safely; but if they should be caught, that they might
						
						 
						
						die an easy and painless death from the poison before
						they should be put to the torture. When he had
					said this, the explanation appeared so very complicated and subtle that it did not seem to come from
					fancy, but from knowledge; and the people surrounded him and questioned him one after another,
					 Who are you? 
 Who knows you? 
 How
						did you come to know this? and at last he was put
					through so thorough an examination that he confessed
					to being one of the robbers.
				 
 
					Were not the murderers of Ibycus caught in the
					same way? They were sitting in a theatre, and when
					cranes came in sight, they laughed and whispered to
					each other that the avengers of Ibycus were
					come. Persons sitting near overheard them, and
					since Ibycus had disappeared and now for a long time
					had been sought, they caught at this remark and
					reported it to the magistrates. And thus the slayers
					were convicted and led off to prison, not punished
					by the cranes, but compelled to confess the murder
					by the infirmity of their own tongues, as it were
					some Fury or spirit of vengeance. For as in the
					body the neighbouring parts are borne by attraction toward diseased and suffering parts, so the
					tongue of babblers, ever inflamed and throbbing,
					draws and gathers to itself some portion of what has
					been kept concealed and should not be revealed.
					Therefore the tongue must be fenced in, and reason
					must ever lie, like a barrier, in the tongue's way,
					checking its flow and keeping it from slipping, in
					order that we may not be thought to be less sensible
					than geese, of whom they relate that when from
					
					 
					
					Cilicia they cross Mt. Taurus, which is full of eagles,
					they take a great stone in their mouths to serve as
					a bolt or bridle for their scream, and pass over at
					night unobserved.

Now if anyone were to ask,
					 Who is the most wicked and the most abandoned man, 
 
					no one would pass the traitor by and name anyone
					else. So Euthycrates 
 roofed his house with the
						timber he got from Macedon, 
 as Demosthenes 
					says, and Philocrates received much money and
					 bought strumpets and fish ; and to Euphorbus
					and Philagrus, who betrayed Eretria, the king gave
					land. But the babbler is a traitor who volunteers
					his services without pay: he does not betray horses 
					or city-walls, but divulges secrets connected with lawsuits, party strife, and political manoeuvres. No one
					thanks him, but he himself, if he can win a hearing,
					must owe thanks. The result is that the verse
					directed at the man who recklessly and injudiciously
					pours forth and squanders his own possessions,
					 
 You are not generous: it's your disease,
						 
 You love to give, 
 
 
					fits the foolish talker also: You are no friend or
						
						 
						
						well-wisher in revealing this: it's your disease, you
						love to be babbling and prating.

But these remarks are not to be regarded as an
					accusation against garrulity, but an attempt to cure
					it; for we get well by the diagnosis and treatment
					of our ailments, but the diagnosis must come first;
					since no one can become habituated to shun or to
					eradicate from his soul what does not distress him, and
					we only grow distressed with our ailments when we
					have perceived, by the exercise of reason, the injuries
					and shame which result from them. Thus, in the
					present instance, we perceive in the case of babblers
					that they are hated when they wish to be liked, that
					they cause annoyance when they wish to please, that
					they are laughed at when they think they are admired, that they spend their money without any gain,
					that they wrong their friends, help their enemies, and
					destroy themselves. Consequently this is the first
					step in curing the disease - by the application of
					reason to discover the shameful and painful effects
					that result from it.

And the second is that we must apply our
					reasoning powers to the effects of the opposite behaviour, always hearing and remembering and keeping close at hand the praises bestowed on reticence,
					and the solemn, holy, and mysterious character of
					silence, remembering also that terse and pithy
					speakers and those who can pack much sense into a
					short speech are more admired and loved, and are
					considered to be wiser, than these unbridled and
					headstrong talkers. Plato, in fact, commends such
					pithy men, declaring that they are like skilful throwers
					
					 
					
					of the javelin, for what they say is crisp, solid, and
					compact. And Lycurgus,
 		 constraining his fellowcitizens from their earliest childhood to acquire this
					clever habit by means of silence, made them concise
					and terse in speech. For just as the Celtiberians 
					make steel from iron by burying it in the earth and
					then cleaning off the large earthy accumulation, so
					the speech of Spartans has no dross, but being
					disciplined by the removal of all superfluities, it is
					tempered to complete efficiency; for this capacity of
					theirs for aphoristic speech and for quickness and
					the ability to turn out a neat phrase in repartee is
					the fruit of much silence.
				 
 
					And we must be careful to offer to chatterers
					examples of this terseness, so that they may see how
					charming and how effective they are. For example:
					 The Spartans to Philip: Dionysius in Corinth. 
 
					And again, when Philip wrote to them, If I invade
						Laconia, I shall turn you out, they wrote back,
					 If. And when King Demetrius was annoyed and
					shouted, Have the Spartans sent only one envoy to
						me? the envoy replied undismayed, One to one. 
				 
 
					And among the men of old also sententious speakers
					are admired, and upon the temple of the Pythian
					Apollo the Amphictyons inscribed, not the Iliad and
					the Odyssey or the paeans of Pindar, but Know thyself 
 
					
					 
					
					and Avoid extremes and Give a pledge
						and mischief is at hand, 
 admiring, as they did, the
					compactness and simplicity of the expression which
					contains within a small compass a well-forged sentiment. And is not the god himself fond of conciseness
					and brevity in his oracles, and is he not called Loxias 
					because he avoids prolixity rather than obscurity?
					And are not those who indicate by signs, without a
					word, what must be done, praised and admired
					exceedingly? So Heracleitus, when his fellowcitizens asked him to propose some opinion about
					concord, mounted the platform, took a cup of cold
					water, sprinkled it with barley-meal, stirred it with
					penny-royal, drank it up, and departed, thus demonstrating to them that to be satisfied with whatever
					they happen upon and not to want expensive things
					is to keep cities in peace and concord. And Scilurus, 
					king of the Scythians, left behind him eighty sons;
					when he was dying, he asked for a bundle of spearshafts and bade his sons take it and break it in pieces,
					tied closely together as the shafts were. When they
					gave up the task, he himself drew all the spears out
					one by one and easily broke them in two, thus revealing that the harmony and concord of his sons was a
					strong and invincible thing, but that their disunion
					would be weak and unstable.

If anyone will but review and recollect constantly these and similar instances, he may conceivably stop taking pleasure in foolish chatter. But as
					for me, that famous case of the slave puts me utterly
					to shame when I reflect what immense importance it
					
					 
					
					is to pay attention to what is said and to be master of
					our purpose. Pupius Piso, the orator, not wishing to
					be troubled, ordered his slaves to speak only in
					answer to questions and not a word more. Subsequently, wishing to pay honour to Clodius when he
					was a magistrate, Piso gave orders that he be invited
					to dinner and prepared what was, we may suppose, a
					sumptuous banquet. When the hour came, the other
					guests were present, but Clodius was still expected,
					and Piso repeatedly sent the slave who regularly
					carried invitations to see if Clodius was approaching.
					And when evening came and he was finally despaired
					of, Piso said to the slave, See here, did you give him
						the invitation? 
 I did, said the slave. Why
							hasn't he come then? 
 Because he declined. 
					 Then why didn't you tell me at once? 
 Because
						you didn't ask me that. So a Roman slave, but the
					Athenian slave while digging will tell his master
					 On what terms the truce is made, 
 
					so great in all things is the force of habit. And of
					this let us now speak.

For it is impossible to check the babbler by
					gripping the reins, as it were; his disease must be
					mastered by habituation. In the first place, then,
					when questions are asked of neighbours, let him
					accustom himself to remaining silent until all have
					refused a response:
					 For counsel's aim is not that of a race, 
 
					as Sophocles says, nor, indeed, is this the aim of
					
					 
					
					speaking and answering. For in a race the victory is
					his who comes in first; but here, if another makes a
					sufficient answer, it is proper to join in the approval
					and assent and so acquire the reputation of being a
					friendly fellow. But if such an answer is not made,
					then it is not invidious or inopportune both to point
					out the answer others have not known and thus to fili
					in the gap. And, in particular, let us be on our guard,
					when someone else has been asked a question, that we
					do not forestall him by taking the answer out of his
					mouth. For perhaps there are other times also when
					it is not seemly, another having been asked, to
					shoulder him aside and volunteer ourselves, since we
					shall seem to be casting a slur both on the man asked,
					as being unable to furnish what is demanded of him,
					and on the asker, as being ignorant of the source from
					which he can get help; and, in particular, such precipitancy and boldness in answering questions smacks
					of insolence. For one who tries to get in the answTer
					ahead of the man who is questioned suggests, What
						do you need him for? or What does he know? or
					 When I am present, no one else should be asked
						about these matters. And yet we often ask people
					questions, not because we need an answer, but to elicit
					some friendly word from them, and because we wish
					to draw them on to friendly converse, as Socrates did
					with Theaetetus and Charmides. So to take the
					answer out of another's mouth, to divert another's
					hearing and attract his attention and wrest it from
					some other, is as bad as to run up and kiss someone
					who wished to be kissed by somebody else, or to turn
					toward yourself someone who was looking at another;
					since, even if he who has been asked cannot give the
					
					 
					
					information, it is proper to practise restraint and
					conform oneself to the wish of the asker and thus to
					encounter with modesty and decorum the situation,
					an invitation, as it were, given to another. And
					it is also true that if persons who are asked questions
					make mistakes in their answers, they meet with just
					indulgence; but he who voluntarily undertakes an
					answer and anticipates another is unpleasant even if
					he corrects a mistake, and if he makes a mistake
					himself, he affords a malicious joy to one and all, and
					becomes an object of ridicule.

Then the second matter for diligent practice
					concerns our own answers; to these the chatterer
					must pay very close attention: in the first place, that
					he may not inadvertently give a serious answer to
					those who provoke him to talk merely that they may
					insolently ridicule him. 
 		For some persons who require no information, but merely to divert and amuse
					themselves, devise questions and put them to men of
					this sort to set going their foolish twaddle. Against
					this talkers should be on their guard and not leap
					upon a subject quickly, or as though grateful that it
					is offered to them, but should first consider both the
					character of the questioner and the necessity for the
					question. And when it appears that the questioner
					is really anxious to learn, the babbler must accustom
					himself to stop and leave between the question and
					the answer an interval, in which the asker may add
					anything he wishes and he himself may reflect upon
					his reply instead of overrunning and obscuring the
					question by giving a long string of answers in a
					hurry while the question is still being asked. For
					although the Pythian priestess is accustomed to
					
					 
					
					deliver some oracles on the instant, even before the
					question is put-for the god whom she serves
					 Understands the dumb and hears when no man speaks - 
					yet the man who wishes to make a careful answer
					must wait to apprehend exactly the sense and the
					intent of him who asks the question, lest it befall, as
					the proverb has it,
					 They asked for buckets, but tubs were refused. 
					In any case this ravenous hunger for talking must be
					checked so that it may not seem as though a stream
					which has long been pressing hard upon the tongue
					were being gladly discharged at the instance of the
					question. Socrates, in fact, used to control his thirst
					in this manner-he would not allow himself to drink
					after exercise until he had drawn up and poured out
					the first bucketful, so that his irrational part might
					be trained to await the time dictated by reason.

Furthermore, there are three kinds of answers
					to questions: the barely necessary, the polite, and
					the superfluous. For example, if someone asks, Is
						Socrates at home? one person may reply, as it
					were unwillingly and grudgingly, Not at home. 
					And if he wishes to adopt the Laconic style, he may
					omit the At home and only utter the bare negative. So the Spartans, when Philip wrote to ask if
					they would receive him into their city, wrote a large
					 No on the paper and sent it back. Another will
					answer more politely, He is not at home, but at the
						bank, and if he wants to give fuller measure may
					
					 
					
					add, waiting there for some guests. But your
					over-officious and garrulous man, particularly if he
					happens to have read Antimachus
 		 of Colophon, will
					say, He is not at home, but at the bank, waiting for
						some Ionian guests on whose behalf he has had a
						letter from Alcibiades who is near Miletus staying
						with Tissaphernes, the satrap of the Great King,
						who formerly used to help the Spartans, but now is
						attaching himself to the Athenians because of Alcibiades. For Alcibiades desires to be restored to his
						native country and therefore is causing Tissaphernes
						to change sides. And he will run on, reciting at full
					stretch the whole eighth book of Thucydides, and
					deluge the questioner until, before he has done,
					Miletus is at war again and Alcibiades exiled for the
					second time.
				 
 
					Regarding this tendency especially, one must keep
					talkativeness within bounds by following the question
					step by step and circumscribing the answer within a
					circle to which the questioner's need gives the centre
					and the radius. So when Carneades,
 	 who had not
					yet acquired a great reputation, was disputing in a
					gymnasium, the director sent and bade him lower his
					voice, which was a very loud one. And when Carneades said, Give me something to regulate my
						voice, the director aptly rejoined, I am giving you
							the person conversing with you. So, in making an
					answer, let the wishes of the questioner provide the
					regulation.

Moreover, just as Socrates used to urge men
					to be on their guard against those foods which induce
					us to eat when we are not hungry, and against those
					liquids which induce us to drink when we are not
					thirsty, so it is with the babbler as regards subjects
					for talk: those in which he takes most delight and
					employs 
 ad nauseam 
 he should fear stoutly resist
					when they stream in upon him. For example, military
					men are great tellers of war-stories, and the Poet
					introduces Nestor in that character, often narrating
					his own deeds of prowess. Again, as one might expect,
					those who have scored a victory in the law-courts or
					have had some unexpected success at the courts of
					governors or kings are attacked, as it were, by a
					malady which never leaves them, by the desire to call
					to mind and tell over and over again how they made
					their entrance, how they were presented, how they
					argued, how they held forth, how they confuted some
					opponents or accusers, how they were applauded.
					For their delight is far more loquacious than that
					well-known insomnia in the comedy : it often fans
					itself into new flame and makes itself ever fresh with
					each successive telling. They are, therefore, ready to
					slip into such subjects on any pretext. For not only
					 Where one feels pain, there will he keep his hand,
						 
 
					but also what causes pleasure draws the voice toward
					itself and twists the tongue from a desire to dwell
					perpetually on the joys of remembrance. So also
					with lovers, who chiefly occupy themselves with conversation
					
					 
					
					that recalls some memory of the objects of
					their love; and if they cannot talk to human beings,
					they will speak of their passion to inanimate things:
					 O dearest bed! 
					and
					 
 O blessed lamp, Bacchis thought you a god,
						 
 And greatest god you are if she thinks so. 
 
 
				 
 
					There is, however, really not a pin's difference to
					the chatterer what subjects may arise; nevertheless
					he that has a greater weakness for one class of
					subjects than for the other should be on his guard
					against these subjects and force himself to hold back
					and withdraw as far as possible from them, since they
					are always able, because of the pleasure they give,
					to lure him on to dilate upon them. And talkers
					have this same difficulty with those subjects in which
					they think that they surpass all others because of
					some experience or acquired habit. For such a
					person, being self-centred and vain,
					 
 Will give the chief part of the day to that
						 
 In which he chances to surpass himself : 
 
					the great reader will spend it in narrating tales, the
					literary expert in technical discussions, the wide
					traveller and wanderer over the face of the earth in
					stories of foreign parts. We must, therefore, be on
					our guard against these subjects also, since garrulity
					is enticed by them, like a beast making for familiar
					
					 
					
					haunts. And Cyrus's 
 	conduct was admirable, because he challenged his mates to match themselves
					with him, not in those contests in which he was
					superior, but in those in which he was less skilled
					than they, so that he might cause no pain by surpassing them and might also have the advantage of
					learning something. But the chatterer, on the contrary, if some topic comes up from which he can learn
					and find out something he does not know, thrusts it
					aside and diverts it, being unable to give even so
					small a fee as silence, but he works steadily around
					until he drives the conversation into the stale and
					well-worn paths of twaddle. Just so, in my native
					town, there was a man who chanced to have read two
					or three books of Ephorus, and would always bore
					everybody to death and put every dinner-party to
					rout by invariably narrating the battle of Leuctra
					and its sequel; so he got the nickname of Epameinondas.

Nevertheless, this is the least of the evils, and
					we should turn garrulity into these channels; for
					talkativeness will be less unpleasant when its excesses
					are in some learned subject. Yet such persons must
					accustom themselves to do some writing and so argue
					all by themselves. So Antipater the Stoic, since, as
					it seems, he could not and would not come to close
					quarters with Carneades and his violent attacks
					upon the Stoa, used to fill whole books with written
					disputations against him, and so earned the sobriquet
					of Pen-valiant. But with the talker, such shadowboxing 
					
					 
					
					with the pen and such alarums, by keeping
					him away from the multitude, may perhaps make him
					less of a daily burden to his associates, just as dogs
					that vent their anger on sticks and stones are less
					savage to men. And it will also be very advantageous for chatterers to frequent invariably the
					company of their superiors and elders, out of respect
					for whose opinion they will become accustomed to
					silence.
				 
 
					And with these exercises in habituation it is proper
					to intermix and entwine that well-known vigilance
					and habit of reflection, at the very moment when we
					are about to speak and the words are hurrying to our
					lips, What is this remark that is so pressing and
						importunate? What object is my tongue panting for? What good will come of its being said
						or what ill of its being suppressed? For it is not
					as though the remark were some oppressive weight
					which one ought to get rid of, since it stays by you
					all the same even if it is spoken; when men talk, it
					is either for their own sake, because they need something, or to benefit their hearers, or they seek to
					ingratiate themselves with each other by seasoning
					with the salt of conversation the pastime or business
					in which they happen to be engaged. But if a remark is neither useful to the speaker nor of serious
					importance to the hearers, and if pleasure or charm is
					not in it, why is it made? For the futile and purposeless can exist in speech as well as in deeds.
				 
 
					And over and above all else we must keep at hand
					and in our minds the saying of Simonides, that he
					had often repented of speaking, but never of holding
					
					 
					
					his tongue. We must remember also that practice is
					master of all things and stronger than anything else;
					since people can even get rid of hiccoughs and coughs
					by resisting them resolutely and with much pain and
					trouble. But silence, as Hippocrates says, not only
					prevents thirst, but also never causes sorrow and
					suffering.