The Celts call Heracles Ogmios in their native tongue, and they portray the god in a very peculiar way. To their notion, he is extremely old, baldheaded, except for a few lingering hairs which are quite gray, his skin is wrinkled, and he is burned as black as can be, like an old sea-dog. You would think him a Charon. or a sub-Tartarean Iapetus —
anything but Heracles! Yet, in spite of his looks,
he has the equipment of Heracles: he is dressed in
the lion’s skin, has the club in his right hand, carries
- the quiver at his side, displays the bent bow in his
left, and is Heracles from head to heel as far as
that goes.

I thought, therefore, that the Celts had
committed this offence against the good-looks of
Heracles to spite the Greek gods, and that they were
punishing him by means of the picture for having
once visited their country on a cattle-lifting foray,
at the time when he raided most of the western
nations in his quest-of the herds of Geryon.

But
I have not yet mentioned the most surprising thing



 

in the picture. That old Heracles of theirs drags
after him a great crowd of men who are all tethered
by the ears! His leashes are delicate chains
fashioned of gold and amber, resembling the
prettiest of necklaces. Yet, though led by bonds so
weak, the men do.not think of escaping, as they
easily could, and they do not pull back at all or brace
their feet and lean in the opposite direction to that
in which he is leading them. In fact, they follow
cheerfully and joyously, applauding their leader and
’ all pressing him close and keeping the leashes slack
in their desire to overtake him; apparently they
would be offended if they were let loose! But let
me tell you without delay what seemed to me the
strangest thing of all. Since the painter had no
place to which he could attach the ends of the
chains, as the god’s right hand already held the
club and his left the bow, he pierced the tip of his
tongue and represented him drawing the men by
that means! Moreover, he has his face turned
toward his captives, and is smiling.

I had stood for a long time, looking, wondering,
puzzling and fuming, when a Celt at my elbow, not
unversed in Greek lore, as he showed by his excellent
use of our language, and who had, apparently,
studied local traditions, said: “I will read you the
riddle of the picture, stranger, as you seem to be
very much disturbed about it. We Celts do not agree
with you Greeks in thinking that Hermes is
Eloquence: we identify Heracles with it, because heis far more powerful than Hermes. And don’t be
surprised: that he is represented as an old man, for
eloquence and eloquence alone is wont to show its


 

full vigour in old age, if your poets are right in
saying
 A young man hath a wandering wit 
 
 Hom. Il. 3.108 .
and Old age has wiser words to say than youth. Eur. Phoen. 530 


That is why your Nestor’s tongue distils honey, and
why the Trojan counsellors have a voice like flowers 
(the flowers mentioned are lilies, if my memory
serves).

This being so, if old Heracles here drags
men after him who are tethered by the ears to
his tongue, don’t be surprised at that, either: you
know the kinship between ears and tongue. Nor is
it a slight upon him that his tongue is pierced.
Indeed,” said he, “I call to mind a line or two of
comedy which I learned in your country:
the talkative
Have, one and all, their tongues pierced at the tip.

In general, we consider that the real Heracles
was a wise man who achieved everything by
eloquence and applied persuasion as his principal
force. His arrows represent words, I suppose, keen,
sure and swift, which make their wounds in souls.
In fact, you yourselves admit that words are
winged.”

Thus far the Celt. And when I was debating
with myself on the question of appearing here, considering whether it was proper for a man of my age,
who had long ago given up lecturing in public, once
more to subject himself to the verdict of so large a
jury, it chanced in the nick of time that I
remembered the picture. Until then I had been







 

afraid that some of you might think I was doing an
altogether boyish thing and at my age shewing the
rashness of youth ; and that then some young fellow
full of Homer might rebuke me by saying “Your
strength is gone” and “Bitter old age has you in his
clutch” and “Your squire is feeble and your steeds
are slow,” aiming the last quip at my feet. But
when I remember that old Heracles, I am moved to
undertake anything, and am not ashamed to be so
bold, since I am no older than the picture.

Goodbye,
then, to strength, speed, beauty and all manner of
physical excellence! Let your god of love, O Tean
poet,
 
glance at my grizzled chin and flit by me if he
will on his gold-gleaming pinions: Hippoclides will
not mind!
 
Now should certainly be the time for
eloquence to flourish and flower and reach its fulness,
to drag as many as it can by the ears and to let fly
many arrows. At least there is no fear that its
quiver will unexpectedly run short!
 
You see what encouragement I apply to my age
and my infirmities. This it is which gave me the
heart to drag my pinnace, long ago laid up, to
the water, provision her as best I could and set sail
on the high seas once more. Be it your part,





 

ye gods, to blow me fair, for now if ever do I need a
breeze
 that fills the sail, a good companion. Odyss. 11,7; 12, 149. 
 If
anyone thinks me worthy, I would have him apply
to me the words of Homer:
 How stout a thigh the old man’s rags reveal ! 
 
 Odyss. 18, 74