That you did not know the word nefandous is
surely clear to everyone. When I had said of you that
you were like a nefandous day—for I well remember
comparing your character to a day of that kind —
how could you, with reference to that word, have
made the stricture that I was barbarous in my speech,
unless you were wholly unacquainted withit? I shall
teach you presently what nefandous means ; but I say
to you now what Archilochus once said: “You have
caught a cicada by the wing.” Have you ever
heard of a writer of iambic verses named Archilochus,
a Parian by birth, a man absolutely independent and
given to frankness, who did not hesitate at all to use
insulting language, no matter how much pain he was




 

going to inflict upon those who would be exposed to
the gall of his iambics? Well, when he was abused
by someone of that type, he said that the man had
caught a cicada by the wing, likening himself,
Archilochus, to the cicada, which by nature is
vociferous, even without any compulsion, but when
it is caught by the wing, cries out still more lustily.
“Unlucky man,” said he, “what is your idea in
provoking against yourself a vociferous poet, in search
of motives and themes for his iambics?”

In these same terms I threaten you, not likening
myself to Archilochus (how could I? I am far indeed
from that!), but aware that you have done in your
life hundreds of things which deserve iambics. Even
Archilochus himself, I think, would not have been
able to cope with them, though he invited both
Simonides and Hipponax to take a hand with him
in treating just one of your bad traits, so childish in
every sort of iniquity have you made Orodocides and
Lycambes and Bupalus, their butts, appear. Probably it was one of the gods who brought the smile to
your lips on that occasion at my use of the word
nefandous, in order that you might become more
notorious than a Scythian for being absolutely
uneducated and ignorant of these obvious matters of
common knowledge, and that you might afford a
reasonable excuse for attacking you to an independent





 

man who knows you thoroughly from home and will
not refrain from telling—I should say, heralding
abroad—all that you do by night and by day even
now, in addition to those many incidents of your
past.

And yet it is idle, no doubt, and superfluous to deal
frankly with you by way of education; for in the first
place you yourself could never improve in response
to my censure, any more than a tumble-bug could be
persuaded not to roll those balls of his any longer,
when once he has become used to them. In the
second place, I do not believe that anyone exists who
still is ignorant of your brazen performances and of
the sins that you, an old man, have committed
against yourself. You are not to that extent secure
or unobserved in your iniquity. There is no need of
anyone to strip away your lion’s skin that you may
be revealed a donkey, unless perhaps someone has
just come to us from the Hyperboreans, or is sufficiently Cymaean not to know, as soon as he sees you,
that you are the most unbridled of all asses, without
waiting to hear you bray. Your doings have been
noised abroad so long a time, so far ahead of me,
so universally and so repeatedly; and you have no
slight reputation for them, surpassing Ariphrades,
surpassing the Sybarite Hemitheon, surpassing the
notorious Chian, Bastas, that adept in similar
matters. 

 
Nevertheless, I must speak of them, even if I shall







 

seem to be telling stale news, in order that I may
not bear the blame of being the only one who does
not know about them. But no!

We must callin one
of Menander’s Prologues, Exposure, a god devoted
to Truth and Frankness, by no means the least notable
of the characters that appear on the stage, disliked
only by you and your sort, who fear his tongue because
he knows everything and tells in plain language all
that he knows about you. It would indeed be
delightful if he should prove willing to oblige us by
coming forward and telling the spectators the entire
argument of the play. 

 
Come then, Exposure, best of prologues and divinities, take care to inform the audience plainly that we
have not resorted to this public utterance gratuitously, or in a quarrelsome spirit, or, as the proverb has
it, with unwashen feet, but to vindicate a grievance
of our own as well as those of the public, hating the
man for his depravity. Say only this, and present a
clear exposition, and then, giving us your blessing,
take yourself off, and leave the rest to us, for we shall
copy you and expose the greater part of his career so
thoroughly that in point of truth and frankness you
can find no fault with us. But do not sing my praises
to them, Exposure dear, and do not prematurely
pour out the bald truth about these traits of his; for
it is not fitting, as you are a god, that the words which
describe matters so abominable should come upon
your lips.

“This self-styled sophist” (Prologue is now speaking) “once came to Olympia, purposing to deliver




 

to those who should attend the festival a speech
which he had written long before. The subject of
his composition was the exclusion of Pythagoras (by
one of the Athenians, I suppose) from participation
in the Eleusinian mysteries as a barbarian, because
Pythagoras himself was in the habit of saying that
before being Pythagoras he had once been Euphorbus. In truth, his speech was after the pattern of
Aesop’s jackdaw, cobbled up out of motley feathers
from others. Wanting, of course, to have it thought
that he was not repeating a stale composition but
making up offhand what really came from his book,
he requested one of his familiars (it was the one from
Patras, who has so much business in the courts) to
select Pythagoras for him when he asked for subjects
to talk about. The man did so, and prevailed upon
the audience to hear that speech about Pythagoras.

In the sequel, he was very unconvincing in his
delivery, glibly reciting (as was natural) what he had
thought out long before and learned by heart, no
matter how much his shamelessness, standing by
him, defended him, lent him ahelping hand, and aided
him in the struggle. There was a great deal of
laughter from his hearers, some of whom, by looking
from time to time at that man from Patras, indicated
that they had not failed to detect his part in the
improvisation, while others, recognising the expressions themselves, throughout the performance continued to have that as their sole occupation, testing
each other to find out how good their memories were
at distinguishing which one of those sophists who
achieved fame a little before our time for their


 


so-called “exercises” was the author of each
expression.

“Among all these, among those who laughed, was
the writer of these words. And why should not he
laugh at a piece of cheek so manifest and unconvincing and shameless? So, somehow or other, being one
who cannot control his laughter, when the speaker had
attuned his voice to song, as he thought, and was
intoning a regular dirge over Pythagoras, our
author, seeing an ass trying to play the lyre, as the
saying goes, burst into a very melodious cachinnation,
and the other turned and saw him. That created a
state of war between them, and the recent affair
sprang from it.

It was the beginning of the year, or
rather, the second day after the New Year, the day
on which the Romans, by an ancient custom, make
prayers in person for the entire yearand holdsacrifices,
following ceremonies which King Numaestablished for
them; they are convinced that on that day beyond
all others the gods give ear to those who pray. Well,
on that festival and high holiday, the man who burst
out laughing then in Olympia at the suppositious
Pythagoras saw this contemptible cheat approaching,
this presenter of the speeches of others. It happened
that he knew his character, too, and all his wantonness and unclean living, both what he was said to do,
and what he had been caught doing. So he said to


 

one of his friends: ‘We must give a wide berth to
this ill-met sight, whose appearance is likely to make
the most delightful of all days nefandous for us.’ 

 
“On hearing that, the sophist at once laughed at
the word nefandous as if it were strange and alien to
the Greeks, and paid the man back, in his own
estimation, at least, for the laughter of that former
time, saying to all: ‘Nefandous! What, pray, is
that? A fruit, or a herb, or a utensil? Can it be
something to eat ordrink? For my part I have never
heard the word, and should never be able to guess
what it means.’

He thought he was directing these
remarks at our friend, and he subjected ‘nefandous’
to a great deal of laughter; but he had unwittingly
brought against himself the uttermost proof of his
want of education. Under these circumstances he
who sent me in to you in advance has written this
composition to demonstrate that the renowned
sophist does not know expressions common to all
the Greeks, which even men in the workshops and
the bazaars would know.”

Thus far Exposure. In my own turn (for I myself
have now taken over the rest of the show), I might
fittingly play the part of the Delphic tripod and tell
what you did in your own country, what in Palestine,
what in Egypt, what in Phoenicia and Syria; then,
in due order, in Greece and Italy, and on top of it all,
what you are now doing at Ephesus, which is the
extremity of your recklessness and the culminating



 

point and crowning glory of your character. Now
that, in the words of the proverb, you who live in
Troy have paid to see tragedians, it is a fitting
occasion for you to hear your own misadventures.

But no! not yet. First about that ‘ nefandous.’ 

 
Tell me, in the name of Aphrodite Pandemus and
the Genetyllides and Cybebe, in what respect did
you think the word nefandous objectionable and fit to
be laughed at? Oh, because it did not belong to the
Greeks, but had somehow thrust its way in among
them from their intercourse with Celts or Thracians
or Scyths; wherefore you—for you know everything
that pertains to the Athenians—excluded it at once
and banished it from the Greek world, and your
laughter was because I committed a barbarism and
used a foreign idiom and went beyond the Attic
bounds ! 

 
“Come now, what else is as well established on
Athenian soil as that word?” people would say who
are better informed than you about such matters.
It would be easier for you to prove Erechtheus and
Cecrops foreigners and invaders of Attica, than to
show that ‘ nefandous ’ is not at home and indigenous
in Attica. There are many things which they designate in the same way as everybody else, but they,
and they alone, designate as nefandous a day which
is vile, abominable, inauspicious, useless, and like
you.

There now! I have already taught you in
passing what they mean by nefandous!



 
 

 
When official business is not transacted, introduction of lawsuits is not permissible, sacrifice of victims
is not performed, and, in general, nothing is done
that requires good omens, that day is nefandous.

The custom was introduced among different peoples
in different ways; either they were defeated in great
battles and subsequently established that those days
on which they had undergone such misfortunes
should be useless and invalid for their customary transactions, or, indeed—but it is inopportune, perhaps,
and by now unseasonable to try to alter an old
man’s education and reinstruct him in such matters
when he does not know even what precedes them. 
It can hardly be that this is all that remains, and that
if you learn it, we shall have you fully informed!
Nonsense, man! Not to know those other expressions
which are off the beaten path and obscure to ordinary
folk is pardonable ; but even if you wished, you could
not say nefandous in any other way, for that is everyone’s sole and only word for it.

“Well and good,” someone will say, “but even in
the case of time-honoured words, only some of them
are to be employed, and not others, which are
unfamiliar to the public, that we may not disturb the
wits and wound the ears of our hearers.” My dear
sir, perhaps as far as you are concerned I was wrong
to say that to you about yourself; yes, yes, I should
have followed the folk-ways of the Paphlagonians or
the Cappadocians or the Bactrians in conversing with
you, that you might fully understand what was being
said and it might be pleasing to your ears. But
Greeks, I take it, should be addressed in the Greek
tongue. Moreover, although even the Athenians in


 

course of time have made many changes in their
speech, this word especially has continued to be used
in this way always and by all of them.

I should have named those who have employed
the word before our time, were I not certain to
disturb you in this way also, by reciting names of
poets and rhetoricians and historians that would be
foreign to you, and beyond your ken. No, I shall not
name those who have used it, for they are known to
all; but do you point me out one of the ancients who
has not employed the word and your statue shall be
set up, as the saying goes, in gold at Olympia.
Indeed, any old man, full of years, who is unacquainted
with such expressions is not, I think, even aware
that the city of Athens is in Attica, Corinth at the
Isthmus, and Sparta in the Peloponnese.

It remains, perhaps, for you to say that you knew
the word, but criticised the inappropriate use of it.
Come now, on this point too I shall respond to you
fittingly, and you must pay attention, unless not
knowing matters very little to you. The ancients
were before me in hurling many such taunts at the
like of you, each at the men of their day; for in that
time too there were, of course, dirty fellows, disgusting traits, and ungentle dispositions. One man
called a certain person “Buskin,” comparing his
principles, which were adaptable, to that kind of
footwear ; another called a man “Rampage” because
he was a turbulent orator and disturbed the assembly,
and another someone else “Seventh Day” because
he acted in the assemblies as children do on the



 

seventh day of the month, joking and making fun
and turning the earnestness of the people into jest. 
Will you not, then, in the name of Adonis, permit
me to compare an utterly vile fellow, familiar with
every form of iniquity, to a disreputable and inauspicious day ?

We avoid those who are lame in the right foot,
especially if we should see them early in the morning; and if anyone should see a cut priest or a eunuch
or a monkey immediately upon leaving the house,
he returns upon his tracks and goes back, auguring
that his daily business for that day will not be
successful, thanks to the bad and inauspicious omen
at the start. But in the beginning of the whole year,
at its door, on its first going forth, in its early morning, if one should see a profligate who commits and
submits to unspeakable practices, notorious for it,
broken in health, and all but called by the name of
his actions themselves, a cheat, a swindler, a perjurer,
a pestilence, a pillory, a pit, will not one shun him,
will not one compare him to a nefandous day ?

Well, are you not such a person? You will not
deny it, if I know your boldness; indeed, it seems to
me that you are actually vain over the fact that you





 

have not lost the glory of your exploits, but are
conspicuous to all and have made a great noise. If,
however, you should offer opposition and should deny
that you are such a person, who will believe what you
say? The people of your native city (for it is fitting
to begin there)? No, they knew about your first
source of livelihood, and how you gave yourself over
to that pestilential soldier and shared his depravity,
serving him in every way until, after reducing you
to a torn rag, as the saying goes, he thrust you out.

And of course they remember also the effrontery that
you displayed in the theatre, when you acted secondary parts for the dancers and thought you were leader
of the company. Nobody might enter the theatre
before you, or indicate the name of the play ; you were
sent in first, very properly arrayed, wearing golden
sandals and the robe of a tyrant, to beg for favour
from the audience, winning wreaths and making your
exit amid applause, for already you were held in
esteem by them. But now you are a public speaker
and a lecturer! So those people, if ever they hear
such a thing as that about you, believe they see two
suns, as in the tragedy, and twin cities of Thebes,
and everyone is quick to say, “That man who
then—, and after that—?” Therefore you do well
in not going there at all or living in their neighbourhood, but of your own accord remaining in exile from
your native city, thoughit is neither “bad in winter”
not “oppressive in summer,” but the fairest and





 

largest of all the cities in Phoenicia. To be put to
the proof, to associate with those who know and
remember your doings of old, is truly as bad as a
halter in your sight. And yet, why do I make that
silly statement? What would you consider shameful, of all that goes beyond the limit? I am told
that you have a great estate there—that ill-conditioned tower, to which the jar of the man of Sinope 
would be the great hall of Zeus ! 

 
In view of all this, you can never by any means
persuade your fellow-citizens not to think you the
most odious man in the world, a common disgrace to
the whole city.

Could you, though, perhaps win over
the other inhabitants of Syria to vote for you if you
said that you had done nothing bad or culpable in
your life? Heracles! Antioch was an eye-witness
of your misconduct with that youth from Tarsus whom
you took aside—but to unveil these matters is no
doubt shameful for me. However, it is known about
and remembered by those who surprised the pair of
you then and saw him doing—you know what, unless
you are absolutely destitute of memory.

Well, perhaps people in Egypt do not know you,
who received you when, after those marvellous performances of yours in Syria, you went into exile for
the reasons which I have mentioned, pursued by the
clothiers, from whom you had bought costly garments
and in that way obtained your expense-money for the
journey. But Alexandria knows you to be guilty of
offences just as bad, and should not have been ranked
second to Antioch. No, your wantonness there was
more open and your licentiousness more insane, your


 

reputation for these things was greater, and your
head was uncloaked under all circumstances. 
 

 
There is only one person who would have believed
you if you denied having done anything of the sort,
and would have come to your assistance—your latest
employer, one of the first gentlemen of Rome. The
name itself you will allow me to withhold, especially
in addressing people who all know whom I mean.
As to all the liberties taken by you while you were
with him that he tolerated, why should I speak of
them? But when he found you in the company of
his young cup-bearer Oenopion,—what do you think ?
Would he have believed you? Not unless he was
completely blind. No, he made his opinion evident by
driving you out of his house at once, and indeed conducting a lustration, they say, after your departure.

And certainly Greece as well as Italy is completely
filled with-your doings, and your reputation for them,
and I wish you joy of your fame! . Consequently, to
those who marvel at what you are now doing in
Ephesus, I say (and it is true as can be) that they
would not wonder if they knew your early performances. Yet you have learned something new here
having to do with women.

Does it not, then, fit such a man to a hair to call him
nefandous? But why in the name of Zeus should you
take it upon yourselfto kiss us after such performances ?
In so doing you behave very offensively, especially
to those who ought least of all to be so treated, your
pupils, for whom it would have been enough to get
only those other horrid boons from your lips—barbarity of language, harshness of voice, indistinctness,


 

confusedness, complete tunelessness, and the like,
but to kiss you—forfend it, Averter of Ill! Better
kiss an asp or a viper; then the risk is a bite and a
pain which the doctor cures when you call him. But
from the venom of your kiss, who could approach
victims or altars? What god would listen to one’s
prayer? How many bowls of holy water, how many
rivers are required?

And you, who are of that sort, laughed at others in
the matter of words and phrases, when you were doing
such terrible deeds! For my part, had I not known
the word nefandous, I should have been ashamed, so
far am I from denying that I used it. In your own
case, none of us criticised you for saying “bromologous” and “tropomasthletes” and “to rhesimeter,” and “Athenio,” and “anthocracy” and
“sphendicise” and “‘cheiroblime.” May Hermes,
Lord of Language, blot you out miserably, language
and all, for the miserable wretch that you are!
Where in literature do you find these treasures?
Perhaps buried somewhere in the closet of some
composer of dirges, full of mildew and spiders’ webs,
or from the Tablets of Philaenis, which you keep in
hand. For you, however, and for your lips they are
quite good enough.

Now that I have mentioned lips, what would you
say if your tongue, summoning you to court, let us
suppose, should prosecute you on a charge of injury
and at the mildest, assault, saying: “Ingrate, I took
you under my protection when you were poor and
hard up and destitute of support, and first of all I
made you successful in the theatre, making you now
Ninus, now Metiochus, and then presently Achilles 
After that, when you taught boys to spell, I kept you
for a long time; and wien at length you took to
delivering these speeches of yours, composed by other
people, I caused you to be considered a sophist,
attaching to you a reputation which had nothing at
all to do with you. What charge, then, have you to
bring against me, so great that you treat me in this
way, imposing disgraceful tasks and abominable
services? Are not my daily tasks enough, lying,
committing perjury, ladling out such an amount of
silliness and twaddle, or (I should say) spewing out
the nastiness of those speeches? Even at night you
do not allow me, unlucky that I am, to take my rest,
but unaided I do everything for you, am abused,
defiled, treated deliberately like a hand rather than
a tongue, insulted as if I were nothing to you, overwhelmed with so many injuries. My only function
is to talk; other parts have been commissioned to do
such things as those. Oh if only someone had cut
me out, like the tongue of Philomela. More blessed



 

in my sight are the tongues of parents who have eaten
their children!”

In Heaven’s name, if your tongue should say that,
acquiring a voice of its own, and getting your beard
to join in the accusation, what response would you
make? The reply, manifestly, which you made
recently to Glaucus when he rebuked you just after a
performance, that by this means you had speedily
become famous and known to everyone, and how could
you have become so notorious by making speeches ?
It was highly desirable, you said, to be renowned and
celebrated in any way whatsoever. And then you
might tell it your many nicknames, acquired in
different nations. In that connection I marvel at it
that you were distressed when you heard ‘ nefandous ’
but were not angry over those names.

In Syria you
were called Rhododaphne; the reason, by Athena,
I am ashamed to tell. So as far as lies in me, it will
still remain a mystery. In Palestine, you were
Thorn-hedge, with reference, no doubt, to the
prickling of your stubbly beard; for you still kept it
shaved. In Egypt you were called Quinsy, which is
clear. In fact, they say you were nearly throttled
when you ran afoul of a lusty sailor who closed with
you and stopped your mouth. The Athenians, excellent fellows that they are, gave you no enigmatic
name but called you Atimarchus, honouring you with
the addition of a single letter because you had to have
something that went even beyond Timarchus. . And
in Italy—my word! you got that epic nickname of



 

Cyclops, because once, over and above your old bag
of tricks, you took a notion to do an obscene parody
on Homer’s poetry itself, and while you lay there,
drunk already, with a bowl of ivy-wood in your hand,
a lecherous Polyphemus, a young man whom you
had hired came at you as Odysseus, presenting his
bar, thoroughly made ready, to put out your eye;

 
 
 And that he missed; his shaft was turned aside. 
 Its point drove through beside the jawbone’s
root. 
 
 The first line of this cento from the Iliad is XIII, 605 combined with XI, 233; the second is V, 293.
 
 


(Of course it is not at all out of the way, in discussing
you, to be silly.) Well, you as the Cyclops, opening
your mouth and setting it agape as widely as you
could, submitted to having your jaw put out by him,
or rather, like Charybdis, you strove to engulf your
Noman whole, along with his crew, his rudder, and
his sails. That was seen by other people present.
Then the next day your only defence was drunkenness, and you sought sanctuary in the unwatered
wine.

Rich as you are in these choice and numerous
appellations, are you ashamed of ‘nefandous’? In
the name of the gods, tell me how you feel when
the rabble call you names derived from Lesbos and
Phoenicia?, Are you as unacquainted with these as
with ‘nefandous,’ and do you perhaps think they are
praising you? Or do you know these through old
acquaintance, and is it only ‘ nefandous’ that you scorn
as unknown and exclude from your list of names?
Consequently, you are paying us a penalty which
cannot be considered inadequate; no, your notoriety

 

extends even to the women’s quarters. Recently,
for instance, when you had the hardihood to seek a
match in Cyzicus, that excellent woman, who had
very thoroughly informed herself in every particular
said: ‘I do not care to have a man who needs
one.”

Then, being in such case, you bother about words,
do you, and laugh, and insult other people? Not
without reason, for we could not all use expressions
like yours. How ever could we? Who is so greatly
daring in language as to ask for a trident instead of a
sword to use on three adulterers, as you did? Or
to say of Theopompus, in passing judgement on his
Tricaranus, that he had razed the outstanding cities
single-handed with a three-pronged book? And
again, that he had plied a ruinous trident upon Hellas,
and that he was a literary Cerberus. Why, the other
day you even lighted a lantern and went peering
about, for some “brother,” I suppose, that had got
astray. And there are other examples beyond
counting, which it is not worth while to mention,
except for one that was heard and reported. A rich
man, I gather, and two poor men were on bad terms.
Then, in the middle of the story, speaking of the rich
man, you said: “He killed θάτερον (meaning one of
the two, instead of saying τὸν ἕτερον) ; and when those
present laughed, as was natural, by way of correcting
and undoing your slip you said: “No, not that;
he killed ἅτερον Your old-time slips I pass over,
your use of the dual in speaking of three months, of
ἀνηνεμία (for νηνεμία, windlessness), of πέταμαι (for
πέτομαι, I fly), of ἐκχύνειν (for ἐκχεῖν, to pour out), and
all the other fine flowers that adorn your compositions.

As to what you do under the impulsion of poverty
—by our Lady of Necessity! I cannot censure a
single act. It can be overlooked, for example, if a
man in the pinch of hunger who has received moneys
entrusted to him by a man of his own city subsequently takes a false oath that he received nothing;
or if a man shamelessly asks for gifts—begs, in fact—
and steals and plies the trade of publican. That is
not what I am talking about; for there is nothing
invidious in fending off destitution by every means.
But it goes beyond what is endurable when you, a
poor man, pour the proceeds of your shamelessness
into such indulgences only. However, you will permit me to praise one thing, anyhow, that very pretty
performance of yours when you yourself—and you
know it—composed the “Tisias’ Handbook,” that
work of an ill-omened crow, thus robbing that stupid
old man of thirty gold pieces; for because of Tisias’
name he paid seven hundred and fifty drachmas for
the book, gulled into it by you.

I have still a great deal that I might say; but I
willingly forego the rest for you, adding only this:
do as you like in everything else and do not cease to
indulge in such maudlin behaviour at your own
expense, but not that one thing—no, no! It is not
decent to ask people who so act to the same table, to
share a cup with them, and to partake of the same
food. And let there be none of this kissing after
lectures, either, especially with those who have made
‘nefandous’ apply to you not long before. And inasmuch as I have already begun to give friendly advice,



 

have done, if you please, with perfuming your grey
hair, and depilating only certain parts; for if some
ailment is besetting you, your whole body should be
attended to, but if nothing of that sort ails you, what
is the point of your making parts hairless, smooth,
and sleek which should not even be seen? One
thing only is prudent in you, your grey hairs, and
that you no longer dye them, so that you can have
them to cloak your iniquity. Spare them, in Heaven’s
name in this point also, and particularly your beard,
too; do not defile or mistreat it any longer. If
you must, let it be at night and in darkness; but
by day—no, no!—that is absolutely uncivilised and
beastly.

Do not you see that it would have been better for
you to “leave Camarina undisturbed,” and not to
laugh at the word nefandous, which is going to make
your whole life nefandous? Or is something more
still required? As far as in me lies, it shall not
remain wanting. To be sure, you are not yet aware
that you have brought down the whole cartload on
top of you, though you ought to grovel, you glozing
varlet, if a man with hair on him, a swart-breech 
(to use the good old phrase) were simply to look at
you sourly. Perhaps you will even laugh at that,
too—that “glozing varlet”—as if you had heard
something enigmatic and riddling; for you do not
know the words for your actions. So you now have



 

an opportunity to libel these expressions also, in
case “nefandous” has not paid you out, three or
four times over. Anyhow, blame yourself for everything. As that pretty wit Euripides used to say, of
curbless mouths and folly and lawlessness the end is
mischance.