It was on the cards, it seems, that our modern
world should not be altogether destitute of noteworthy and memorable’ men, but should produce
enormous physical prowess and a highly philosophic
mind. I speak with reference to the Boeotian
Sostratus, whom the Greeks called Heracles and
believed to be that hero, and especially to Demonax,
the philosopher. Both these men I saw myself, and
saw with wonderment: and under one of them,
Demonax, I was long a student. I have written
about ‘Sostratus elsewhere,
 
and have described his
size and excessive strength, his open-air life on
Parnassus, his bed that was no bed of ease, his
mountain fare and his deeds (not inconsistent with
his name ) achieved in the way of slaying robbers,
making roads in‘untravelled country and bridging
places hard to pass.

It is now fitting to tell of
Demonax for two reasons—that he may be retained
in memory by men of culture as far as I can bring it
about, and that young men of good instincts who
aspire to philosophy may not have to shape themselves by ancient precedents alone, but may be able
to set themselves a pattern from our modern world
and to copy that man, the best of all the philosophers
whom I know about.

He was a Cypriote by birth, and not of common
stock as regards civic-rank and property. Nevertheless, rising above all this and thinking that he
deserved the best that life offers, he aspired to
philosophy. It was not at the instigation of
Agathobulus or his predecessor Demetrius or
Epictetus, though he studied with all these men and
with Timocrates of Heraclia besides, a wise man of
great sublimity in thought as well as in language.
As I was saying, however, Demonax was not
enlisted in the cause by any of these men, but even
from his boyltood felt the stirring of an individual
impulse toward the higher life and an inborn love for
philosophy, so that he despised all that men count
good, and, committing himself unreservedly to
liberty and free-speech, was steadfast in leading a
Straight, sane, irreproachable life and in setting an
example to all who saw and heard him by his good
judgment and the honesty of his philosophy.

You must not conceive, however, that he rushed
into these matters with unwashen feet, as the saying
goes: he was brought up on the poets and knew
most of them by heart, he was a practised speaker,
his acquaintance with the schools of philosophy was
not secured either in a short time or (to quote the
proverb) “with the tip of his finger,” he had trained
his body and hardened it for endurance and in
general he had made it his aim to require nothing
from anyone else. Consequently, when he found out
that he was no longer sufficient unto himself, he volun-
tarily took his departure from life, leaving behind
him a great reputation among Greeks of culture.

He did not mark out for himself a single form
of philosophy but combined many of them, and never


 

would quite reveal which one he favoured. Probably
he had most in common with Socrates, although he
seemed to follow the man of Sinope 
in dress and in
easy-going ways. He did not, however, alter the
details of his life in order to excite the wonder
and attract the gaze of men he met, but led the
same life as everyone else, was simple and not in the
least subject to pride, and played his part in society
and politics.

He did not cultivate the irony of
Socrates ; his conversations were full of Attic charm,
so that his visitors, on going away, did not feel
contempt for him because he was ill-bred or aversion
to his criticisms because they were gloomy, but
were beside themselves for joy and were far better,
happier and more hopeful of the future than when
they came.

He never was known to make an
uproar or excite himself or get angry, even if he had
to rebuke someone; though he assailed sins, he
forgave sinners, thinking that one should pattern
after doctors, who heal sicknesses but feel no anger
at the sick. He considered that it is human to err,
divine or all but divine to set right what has gone
amiss.

Leading such“a life, he wanted nothing for
himself, but helped his friends in a reasonable way.
Some of them, who were seemingly favoured by
fortune, he reminded that they were elated over
imaginary blessings of brief span. Others, who were
bewailing poverty, fretting at exile or finding fault
with old age or sickness, he laughingly consoled,
saying that they failed to see that after a little they
would have surcease of worries and would all soon find



 

oblivion of their fortunes, good and bad, and lasting
liberty.

He made it his business also to reconcile
brothers at variance and to miake terms of peace
between wives and husbands. On occasion, he has
talked reason to excited mobs, and has usually persuaded them to serve their country in a temperate
spirit.

Such was the character of his philosophy—kind,
gentle and cheerful. The only thing which distressed him was the illness or death of a friend,
for he considered friendship the greatest of human
blessings. For this reason he was everyone’s friend,
and there was no human being whom he did not
include in his affections, though he liked the society
of some better than that of others. He held aloof
only from those who seemed to him to be involved
in sin beyond hope of cure. And in all this, his
every word and deed was smiled on by the Graces
and by Aphrodite, even; so that, to quote the
comedian, “persuasion perched upon his lips.”1

Hence all Athens, high and low, admired him
enormously and always viewed him as a superior
being. Yet in office he ran counter to public opinion
and won from the masses quite as much hatred as
his prototype 
by his freedom of speech and action.
He too had his Anytus and his Meletus who combined
against him and brought the same charges that their
predecessors brought against Socrates, asserting that
he had never been known to sacrifice and was the
only man in the community uninitiated in the Eleusinian mysteries. In reply to this, with right good

 



 

courage he wreathed his head, put on a clean cloak,
went to the assembly and made his defence, which
was in part good-tempered, in part more caustic than
accorded with his scheme of life. Regarding his
never having offered sacrifice to Athena, he said:
“Do not be surprised, men of Athens, that I have not
hitherto sacrificed to her: I did not suppose that she
had any need of my offerings.’”” Regarding the other
charge, the matter of the mysteries, he said that he
had never joined them in the rite because if the
mysteries were bad, he .would not hold his tongue
before the uninitiate but would turn them away from
the cult, while if they were good, he would reveal
them to everybody out of his love for humanity. So
the Athenians, who already had stones in both hands
to throw at him, became good-natured and friendly
toward him at once, and from that time on they
honoured, respected and finally admired him. Yet
in the very beginning of his speech he had used a
pretty caustic introduction, “Men of Athens, you see
me ready with my garland: come, sacrifice me like
your former victim, for on that occasion your offering
found no favour with the gods!”

I should like to cite a few of his well-directed
and witty remarks, and may as well begin with
Favorinus
 and what he said to him. When
Favorinus was told by someone that Demonax was
making fun of his lectures and particularly of the
laxity of their rhythm, saying that it was vulgar and
effeminate and not by any means appropriate to
philosophy, he went to Demonax and asked him:
“Who are you to libel my compositions?” “A


 

man with an ear that is not easy to cheat,” said
he. The sophist kept at him and asked: “What
qualifications had you, Demonax, to leave school
and commence philosophy?” “Those-you lack,” he
retorted.

Another time the same man went to him and
asked what philosophical school he favoured most.
Demonax replied: “Why, who told you that I was
a philosopher?” As he left, he broke into a very
hearty laugh ; and when Favorinus asked him what
he was laughing at, he replied: “It seemed to me
ridiculous that you should think a philosopher can
be told by his beard when you yourself have none.”

When the Sidonian sophist
 
was once showing.
his powers at Athens, and was voicing his own
praise to the effect that he was acquainted with all
philosophy—but I may as well cite his very words :
“If Aristotle calls me to the Lyceum, I shall go
with him; if Plato calls me to the Academy, I shall
come; if Zeno calls, I shall spend my time in the
Stoa ; if Pythagoras calls, I shall hold my tongue.”
 
Well, Demonax arose in the midst of the audience
and said: “Ho” (addressing him by name), “Pythagoras is calling you !”

When a handsome young fellow named Pytho,
who belonged to one of the aristocratic families
in Macedonia, was quizzing him, putting a catchquestion to him and asking him to tell the logical
answer, he said: “I know thus much, my boy—
it’s a poser, and so are you!” Enraged at the
pun, the other said threateningly: “I'll show you
in short order that you’ve a man to deal with!”




 

whereupon Demonax laughingly inquired: “Oh,
you will send for your man, then ?”

When an athlete, whom he had ridiculed for letting himself be seen in gay clothes although he was
an Olympic champion, struck him on the head with
a stone and drew blood, each of the bystanders was
as angry as if he himself had been struck, and they
shouted “Go to the proconsul!” But Demonax
said “No! not to the proconsul—for the doctor !”

Finding a bit of jewelry one day while he was out
walking, he posted a notice in the public square
asking the one who owned it and had lost it to
come and get it by describing the weight of the
setting, the stone, and the engravings on it. Well, a
pretty girl came to him saying that she had lost it;
but as there was nothing right in her description,
Demonax said: “Be off, girl, and don’t lose your
own jewel : this is none of yours !”

A Roman senator in Athens introduced his son
to him, a handsome boy, but girlish and neurasthenic, saying: “My son here pays his respects to
you.” “A dear boy,’ said Demonax, “worthy of
you and like his mother!”

The Cynic who pursued his philosophical studies
clad in a bearskin he would not call Honoratus,
which was his name, but Ursinus.
When a man asked him what he thought was
the definition of happiness, he replied that none but
a free man is happy; and when the other said that
free men were numerous, he rejoined:

“But I have


 

in mind the man who neither hopes nor fears anything.” But how can one achieve this? For the
most part we are all slaves of hope and fear.”
«Why, if you observe human affairs you will find that
they do not afford justification either for hope or for
fear, since, whatever you may say, pains and pleasures
are alike destined to end.”

When Peregrinus Proteus rebuked him for laughing a great deal and making sport of mankind
saying: “Demonax, you're not at all doggish!” he
answered, “Peregrinus, you are not at all human!”

When a scientist was talking of the Topsy-turvy
people (Antipodes), he made him get up, took him
to a well, showed him their own reflection in the
water and asked: “Is that the sort of topsy-turvy
people you mean?”

When a fellow claimed to be a sorcerer and to
have spells so potent that by their agency he could
prevail on everybody to give him whatever he
wanted, Demonax said: “Nothing strange in that!
I am in the same business: follow me to the breadwoman’s, if you like, and you shall see me persuade
her to give me bread with a single spell and a tiny
charm”’—implying that a coin is as good as a spell.
When Herodes, 
the superlative, was mourning
the premature death of Polydeuces and wanted a
chariot regularly made ready and horses put to it
just. as if the boy were going for a drive, and dinner
regularly served for him, Demonax went to him and
said: “Iam bringing you a message from Polydeuces.”




 

Herodes was pleased and thought that Demonax, like
everyone else, was falling in with his humour; so he
said: Well, what does Polydeuces want, Demonax?”
“He finds fault with you,” said he, “for not going
to join him at once!’

He went to a man who was mourning the death
of a son and had shut himself up in the dark, and
told him that he was a sorcerer and could raise the
boy’s shade for him if only he would name three
men who had never mourned for anyone. When the
man hesitated long arfd was perplexed—I suppose he
could not name a single one—Demonax said: “You
ridiculous fellow, do you think, then, that you alone
suffer beyond endurance, when you see that nobody
is unacquainted with mourning?”

He also liked to poke fun at those who use
obsolete and unusual. words in conversation. For
instance, to a man who had been asked a certain
question by him and had answered in far-fetched
book-language, he said: “I asked you now, but you
answer me as if I had asked in Agamemnon’s
day.”

When one of his friends said: “Demonax, let’s
go to the Aesculapium and pray for my son,” he
replied: “You must think Aesculapius very deaf,
that he can’t hear our prayers from where we
are!”

On seeing two philosophers very ignorantly debating a given subject, one asking silly questions and
the other giving answers that were not at all to the
point, he said: ‘“Doesn’t it seem to you, friends,
that one of these fellows is milking a he-goat and
the other is holding a sieve for him!”

When Agathocles the Peripatetic was boasting


 

that he was first among the logicians—that there
was no other, he said: “Come now, Agathocles; if
there is no other, you are not first: if you are first,
then there are others.”

Cethegus the ex-consul, going by way of Greece
to Asia to be his father’s lieutenant, did and said
many ridiculous things. One of the friends of
Demonax, looking on, said that he was a great goodfor-nothing. ‘No, he isn’t, either,” said he—“nota
great one!”

When he saw Apollonius the philosopher leaving
the city with a multitude of disciples (he was
called away to be tutor to the emperor), Demonax remarked: “There goes Apollonius and his
Argonauts !”

When a man asked him if lie thought that the
soul was immortal, he said: “Yes, but no more so
than everything else.”

Touching Herodes he remarked that Plato was
right in saying that we have more than one soul,
for a man with only one could not feast Regilla
 
and
Polydeuces as if they were still alive and say what
he did in his lectures.

Once, on hearing the proclamation which precedes the mysteries, he made bold to ask the
Athenians publicly why they exclude foreigners,
particularly as the founder of the rite, Eumolpus,
was a foreigner and a Thracian to boot!

Again, when he was intending to make a voyage
in winter, one of his friends remarked: “Aren’t
you afraid the boat will capsize and the fishes will





 

eat you?” “I should be an ingrate,” said he, “if I
made any bones about letting the fishes eat me,
when I have eaten so many of them!”

An. orator whose delivery was wretched was
advised by him to practise and exercise; on his
replying: “I am always reciting to myself,”
Demonax answered: “Then no wonder you recite
that way, with a fool for a hearer!”

Again, on seeing a soothsayer make public forecasts
for money, he said: “1 don’t see on what ground you
claim the fee: if you think you can change destiny
in any way, you ask too little, however much you
ask; but if everything is to turn out as Heaven has
ordained, what good is your soothsaying ?”

When a Roman ofticer, well-developed physically, gave him an exhibition of sword-practice on a
post, and asked: “What did you think of my
swordsmanship, Demonax ?”’ he said: “Fine, if you
have a wooden adversary !”

‘Moreover, when questions were unanswerable he
always had an apt retort ready. When a man asked
him’ banteringly: “1f I should burn a thousand
pounds of wood, Demonax, how many pounds of
smoke would it make?” he replied: “Weigh the
ashes: all the rest will be smoke.”

A man named Polybius, quite uneducated and
ungrammatical, said: “The emperor has honoured
‘me with the Roman citizenslfip.” “Oh, why
didn’t he make you a Greek instead of a Roman?”
said he.

On seeing an aristocrat who set great store on
the breadth of his purple band, Demonax, taking
hold of the garment and calling his attention to it,


 

said in his ear: “A sheep wore this before you, and
he was but a sheep for all that!”

When he was taking a bath and hesitated to
enter the steaming water, a man reproached him
with cowardice. “Tell me,’ said he, “was my
country at stake in the matter?”

When someone asked him: “What do you
think it is like in Hades?” he replied: “Wait a
bit, and I'll send you word from there!”

A vile poet named Admetus told him that he
had written an epitaph in a single line and had given
instructions in his will to have it carved on his tomb- .
stone. I may as well quote it exactly :
 Earth, in thy bosom receive Admetus’s husk ; he’s a god now! 
Demonax said with a laugh: “The epitaph is so fine
that I wish it were already carved!”

A man saw on the legs of Demonax a
discoloration of the sort that is natural to old
people, and enquired:

“What’s that, Demonax?”’
With a smile he said: “The ferryman’s toothmark !”

He, saw a Spartan beating a lave, and said:
“Stop treating him as your equal !’

When a woman named Danae had a dispute
with her brother, he said: “Go to law!

Though
your name be Danae, you are not the daughter "of
Acrisius (Lawless).”

Above all, he made war on those who cultivate
philosophy in the spirit of vainglory and not in the
spirit of truth. For example, on seeing a Cynic with
cloak and wallet, but with a bar (hyperon) for a



 

staff, who was making an uproar and saying that: he
was the follower of Antisthenes, Crates, and
Diogenes, Demonax said: “Don’t lie! You are.
really a disciple of Barson (Hyperides )!”

When he saw many of the athletes fighting
foul and breaking the rules of the games by biting
instead of boxing, he said : “No wonder the athletes
of the present day are called ‘lions’ by their
hangers-on !”

His remark to the proconsul was at once
clever and cutting. This man was one of the sort
that use pitch to remove hair from their legs and
their whole bodies. When a Cynic mounted a stone
and charged him with this, accusing him of
effeminacy, he was angry, had the fellow hauled
down and was on the point of confining him in the
stocks or even sentencing him to exile. But Demonax,
who was passing by, begged him to pardon the man
for making bold to speak his mind in the traditional
Cynic way. The proconsul said: “Well, I will let
him off for you this time, but if he ever dares to do
such a thing again, what shall be done to him?”
"Have him depilated !" said Demonax.

One to whom the emperor had entrusted the
command of legions and of the most important
province asked Demonax what was the best way to
exercise authority. “Don’t lose your temper!” said
he: “Do little talking and much listening!”

When someone asked him: “Do you eat honeycakes?”’ he replied: “What! do you think the
bees lay up their honey just for fools?”

On seeing near the Painted Porch a statue with
its hand cut off, he remarked that it was pretty
late in the day for the Athenians to be honouring
Cynegirus
 
with a bronze statue.

Noting that Rufinus the Cypriote (I mean the
‘lame man of the school of Aristotle) was spending
much time in the walks of the Lyceum, he
remarked: “Pretty cheeky, I call it—a lame
Peripatetic (Stroller) !”

When Epictetus rebuked him and advised him to
get married and have children, saying that a philosopher ought to leave nature a substitute when he
is gone, his answer was very much to the point:
« Then give me one of your daughters, Epictetus!”

His reply to Herminus the Aristotelian deserves
mention, Aware that, although he was an out-andout scoundrel and had done a thousand misdeeds,
he sang the praises of Aristotle and had his Ten
Sentences (the Categories) on his tongue’s end,
Demonax said: “Herminus, you really need ten
sentences !”

When the Athenians, out of rivalry with the
Corinthians, were thinking of holding a gladiatorial
show, he came before th.m and said: “Don’t pass
this resolution, men of Athens, without first pulling
down the altar of Mercy.”

When he went to Olympia’and the Eleans voted
him a bronze statue, he said: “Don’t do this, men
of Elis, for fear you may appear to reflect on yotr
ancestors because they did not set up statues either
to Socrates or to Diogenes.”

I once heard him say to..., the lawyer, that
in all likelihood the laws were of no use, whether
framed for the bad or the good ; for the latter had no
need of laws, and the former were not improved by
them.

From Homer the one line he most frequently
quoted was :

 Idler or toiler,’ tis all one to Death.’ 
 Iliad 9, 320.

He had a good word even for Thersites, calling
him a mob-orator of the Cynic type.

When he was once asked which of the philosophers he liked, he said: “They are all admirable,
but for my part I revere Socrates, I wonder at
Diogenes, and I love Aristippus.”

He lived almost a hundred years, without illness
or pain, bothering nobody and asking nothing of
anyone, helping his friends and never making an
enemy. Not only the Athenians but all Greece
conceived such affection for him that when he passed
by the magistrates rose up in his honour and there
was silence everywhere. Toward the end, when ‘he
was very old, he used to eat and sleep uninvited in
any house which he chanced to be passing, and
the inmates thought that it was almost a divine visitation, and that good fortune had entered their
doors. As he went by, the bread-women would pull
him toward them, each wanting him to take some
bread from her, and she who succeeded in giving it
thought that she was in luck. The children, too,
brought him fruit and called him father. Once when



 

there was a party quarrel in Athens, he went intod
the assembly and just by showing himself reduced
them to silence: then, seeing that they had already
repented, he went away without a word.

When he realised that he was no longer able
to wait upon himself, he quoted to those who
were with him the verses of the heralds at the
games :
 
 Here endeth a contest awarding the fairest 
 Of prizes: time calls, and forbids us delay. 
 
Then, refraining from all food, he took leave of life
in the same cheerful humour that people he met
always saw him in.

A short time before the end
he was asked: “What orders have you to give
about your burial?” and replied: “Don’t borrow
trouble! The stench will get me buried!” The
man said: “Why, isn’t it disgraceful that the body
of such a man should be exposed for birds and
dogs to devour?” “I see nothing out of the way
in it,” said he, “if even in death I am going to be
of service to living things.”

But the Athenians
gave him a magnificent public funeral and mourned
him Jong. To honour him, they did obeisance to
the stone bench on which he used to rest when he
was tired, and they put garlands on it; for they felt
that even the stone on which he had been wont to
sit was sacred. Everybody attended his burial,
especially the philosophers ; indeed, it was they who
took him on their shoulders and carried him to the
tomb. 

 
These are a very few things out of many which I
might have mentioned, but they will suffice to give
my readers a notion of the sort of man he was.