No sooner had I left off school, being then well
on in my teens, than my father and his friends
began to discuss what he should have me taught
next. Most of them thought that higher education
required great labour, much time, considerable
expense, and conspicuous social position, while our
circumstances were but moderate and demanded .
speedy relief; but that if I were to learn one of
the handicrafts, in the first place I myself would
immediately receive my support from the trade
instead of continuing to share the family table at
my age; besides, at no distant day I would delight
my father by bringing home my earnings regularly.

The next topic for discussion was opened by
raising the question, which of the trades was best,
easiest to learn, suitable for a man of free birth,
required an outfit that was easy to come by, and
offered an income that was sufficient. Each praised
a different trade, according to his own judgement or
experience ; but my father looked at my uncle (for
among the company was my uncle on my mother’s
side, who had the reputation of being an excellent.
sculptor) and said: “It isn’t right that any other

 

trade should have the preference while you are by.
Come, take this lad in hand’—with a gesture
toward me—“and teach him to be a good stone-cutter, mason, and sculptor, for he is capable of it,
since, as you know, he has a natural gift for it.”’
He drew this inference from the way in which I
had played with wax; for whenever my teachers
dismissed me I would scrape the wax from my
tablets and model cattle or horses or even men, and’
they were true to life, my father thought. I used
to get thrashings from my teachers on account of
them, but at that time they brought me praise for
my cleverness, and good hopes were entertained of
me, on the ground that I would soon learn the trade,
to judge from that modelling.

So, as soon as it seemed to be a suitable day to
begin a trade, I was turned over to my uncle, and I
was not greatly displeased with the arrangement, I
assure you; on the contrary, I thought it involved
interesting play of a sort, and a chance to show off
to my schoolmates if I should turn out to be carving
gods and fashioning little figures for myself and for
those I liked best. Then came the first step and
the usual experience of beginners. My uncle gave
me a chisel and told me to strike a light blow on a
slab that lay at hand, adding the trite quotation:
“Well begun, half done.” But in my inexperience
I struck too hard; the slab broke, and in a gust of
anger he seized a stick that lay close by and put me
through an initiation of no gentle or encouraging
sort, so that tears were the overture to my apprenticeship.

I ran away from the place and came home sobbing
continuously, with my eyes abrim with tears. I told

 

about the stick, showed the welts and charged my
uncle with great cruelty, adding that he did it out of
jealousy, for fear that I should get ahead of him in
his trade. My mother comforted me and roundly
abused her brother, but when night came on, I fell
asleep, still tearful and thinking of the stick.

Up to this point my story has been humorous and
childish, but what you shall hear next, gentlemen,
is not to be made light of; it deserves a very
receptive audience. The fact is that, to use the
words of Homer,

 
 
 a god-sent vision appeared unto me in my slumber
Out of immortal night, 
 
 Iliad2, 56. 
 


so vivid as not to fall short of reality in any way.
Indeed, even after all this time, the figures that I
saw continue to abide in my eyes and the words that
I heard in my ears, so plain was it all.

Two women, taking me by the hands, were each
trying to drag me toward herself with might and
main ; in fact, they nearly pulled me to pieces in
their rivalry. Now one of them would get the
better of it and almost have me altogether, and now
I would be in the hands of the other. They
shouted at each other, too, one of them saying,
‘He is mine, and you want to get him!” and the
other: “It is no good your claiming what belongs
to someone else.” One was like a workman, masculine, with unkempt hair, hands full of callous
places, clothing tucked up, and a heavy layer of

 

warble-dust upon her, just as my uncle looked when
he cut stone. The other, however, was very fair of
face, dignified in her appearance, and nice in her
dress. 

 
At length they allowed me to decide which of
them I wanted to be with. The first to state her
case was the hard-favoured, masculine one.

“Dear boy, I am the trade of Sculpture which
you began to learn yesterday, of kin to you and
related by descent ; for your grandfather”—and she
gave the name of my mother’s father—“was a
sculptor, and so are both your uncles, who are very
famous through me. If you are willing to keep
clear of this woman’s silly nonsense” —with a gesture
toward the other—“and to come and live with me,
you will be generously kept and will have powerful
shoulders, and you will be a stranger to jealousy of
any sort; besides you will never go abroad, leaving
your native country and your kinsfolk, and it will
not be for mere words, either, that everyone will
praise you.

“Do not be disgusted at my humble figure and
my soiled clothing, for this is the way in which
Phidias began, who revealed Zeus, and Polycleitus,
who made Hera, Myron, whom men praise, and
Praxiteles, at whom they marvel. Indeed, these men
receive homage second only to the gods. If you
become one of them, will you not yourself be
famous in the sight of all mankind, make your

 

father envied, and cause your native land to be
admired ?” 

 
Sculpture said all this, and even more than this,
with a great deal of stumbling and bad grammar,
talking very hurriedly and trying to convince me:
I do not remember it all, however, for most of it has
escaped my memory by this time. 

 
When she stopped, the other began after this
fashion :

“My child, I am Education, with whom you are
already acquainted and familiar, even if you have
not yet completed your experience of me. What
it shall profit you to become a sculptor, this
woman has told you; you will be nothing but
a labourer, toiling with your body and putting in it
your entire hope of a livelihood, personally inconspicuous, getting meagre and_ illiberal returns,
humble-witted, an insignificant figure in public,
neither sought by your friends nor feared by your
enemies nor envied by your fellow-citizens—nothing
but just a labourer, one of the swarming rabble, ever
cringing to the man above you and courting the man
who can use his tongue, leading a hare’s life, and
counting as a godsend to anyone stronger. Even
if you should become a Phidias or a Polycleitus and
should create many marvellous works, everyone
would praise your craftsmanship, to be sure, but
none of those who saw you, if he were sensible,
would pray to be like you; for no matter what you
might be, you would be considered a mechanic, a
man who has naught but his hands, a man who lives
by his hands.

“If you follow my advice, first of all I shall show
you many works of men of old, tell you their

 

wondrous deeds and words, and make you conversant
with almost all knowledge, and I shall ornament your
soul, which concerns you most, with many noble
adornments—temperance, justice, piety, kindliness,
reasonableness, understanding, steadfastness, love of
all that is beautiful, ardour towards all that is sublime ;
for these are the truly flawless jewels of the soul.
Nothing that came to pass of old will escape you;
and nothing that must now come to pass; nay, you
will even foresee the future with me. In a word,
I shall speedily teach you everything that there is,
whether it pertains to the gods or to man.

“You who are now the beggarly son of a nobody,
who have entertained some thought of so illiberal a
trade, will after a little inspire envy and jealousy
in all men, for you will be honoured and lauded, you
will be held in great esteem for the highest qualities
and admired by men_ preeminent in lineage and in
wealth, you will wear clothing such as this”—she
pointed to her own, and she was very splendidly
dressed—“and will be deemed worthy of office and
precedence. If ever you go abroad, even on foreign
soil you will not be unknown or inconspicuous, for
will attach to you such marks of identification that
everyone who sees you will nudge his neighbour and
point you out with his finger, saying, ‘There he is!’

If anything of grave import befalls your friends or
even the entire city, all will turn their eyes upon
you; and if at any time you chance to make a
speech, the crowd will listen open-mouthed, marvelling and felicitating you upon your eloquence and
your father upon his good fortune. They say that
some men become immortal. I shall bring this to pass


 

with you; for though you yourself depart from life, you
will never cease associating with men of education and
conversing with men of eminence. You know whose
son Demosthenes was, and how great I made him.
You know that Aeschines was the son of a tambourine girl, but for all that, Philip paid court to him
for my sake. And Socrates himself was brought upunder the tutelage of our friend Sculpture, but as
soon as he understood what was better he ran away
from her and joined my colours ; and you have heard
how his praises are sung by everyone.

“On the other hand, if you turn your back upon
these men so great and noble, upon glorious deeds
and sublime words, upon a dignified appearance,
upon honour, esteem, praise, precedence, power and
offices, upon fame for eloquence and felicitations for
wit, then you will put on a filthy tunic, assume a
servile appearance, and hold bars and gravers and
sledges and chisels in your hands, with your back bent
over your work; you will be a groundling, with groundling ambitions, altogether humble ; you will never lift
your head, or conceive a single manly or liberal
thought, and although you will plan to make your
works well-balanced and well-shapen, you will not
show any concern to make yourself well-balanced and
sightly ; on the contrary, you will make yourself a
thing of less value than a block of stone.”

While these words were still on her lips, without
waiting for her to finish what she was saying, I stood
up and declared myself. Abandoning the ugly


 

working-woman, I went over to Education with a
right good will, especially when the stick entered
my mind and the fact that it had laid many a blow
upon me at the very outset the day before. When
I abandoned Sculpture, at first she was indignant
and struck her hands together and ground her
teeth ; but at length, like Niobe in the story, she
grew rigid and turned to stone. Her fate was
strange, but do not be incredulous, for dreams work
miracles.

The other fixed her eyes upon me and said: “I
will therefore repay you for the justice that you have
done in judging this issue rightly : come at once and
mount this car”—pointing to a car with winged
horses resembling Pegasus—“in order that you may
know what you would have missed if you had not
come with me.” When I had mounted she plied whip
and reins, and I was carried up into the heights and
went from the East to the very West, surveying
cities and nations and peoples, sowing something
broadcast over the earth like Triptolemus. I do not
now remember what it was that I sowed; only that
men, looking up from below, applauded, and all those
above whom I passed in my flight sped me on my way
with words of praise.

After all this had been shown to me and I to the
men who applauded, she brought me back again, no
longer dressed in the same clothing that I wore when
I began the flight ; I dreamed that I came back in
princely purple. Finding my father standing and
waiting, she pointed him out my clothing and the

 

guise in which I had returned, and even reminded
him gently of the plans that they had narrowly
escaped making for me. 

 
That is the dream which I remember having had
when I wasa slip of a lad; it was due, I suppose, to
my agitation on account of the fear inspired by the
thrashing.

Even as I speaking, “Heracles!!” someone
said, “what a long and tiresome dream!” Then
someone else broke in: “A winter dream, when the
nights are longest ; or perhaps it is itself a product
of three nights, like Heracles! What got into him
to tell us this idle tale and to speak of a night of his
childhood and dreams that are ancient and superannuated ?_ It is flat to spin pointless yarns. Surely
he doesn't take us for interpreters of dreams?” No,
my friend; and Xenophon, too, when he told one
time. how he dreamed that a bolt of lightning,
striking his father’s house, set it afire, and all the
rest of it—you know it—did not do so because he
wanted the dream interpreted, nor yet because he
had made up his mind to talk nonsense, particularly
in time of war and in a desperate state of affairs,
with the enemy on every side; no, the story had a
certain usefulness.

So it was with me, and I told you this dream in
order that those who are young may take the better
direction and cleave to education, above all if poverty



 

is making any one of them faint-hearted and inclining him toward the worse, to the detriment of a
noble nature. He will be strengthened, I am very
sure, by hearing the tale, if he takes me as an
adequate example, reflecting what I was when
aspired to all that is finest and set my heart on
education, showing no weakness in the face of my
poverty at that time, and what I am now, on my
return to you—if nothing more, at least quite as
highly thought of as any sculptor.