INTRODUCTION 
 
					This brief essay consists of repeated warnings, enlivened by numerous examples and anecdotes, against
					running into debt. There is nothing to indicate that
					it was delivered as a lecture, but it would probably
					have been interesting to an audience of Plutarch's
					time, and may have been written with an audience
					in mind. It contains no profound or original doctrines, but is simply an agreeable presentation of
					somewhat commonplace thoughts - rather learned,
					rather literary, rather sensible, and, to the modern
					reader, rather amusing.

Plato in the Laws 
 forbids people to take any
					water from a neighbour's land unless they have dug
					on their own land down to a layer of potter's clay,
					as it is called, and found that the place will not produce a flow of water; for the potter's clay, being
					by nature oily and solid, holds back the water that
					reaches it and does not let it through; but, he says,
					those shall have a share of others' water who cannot
					get any of their own, for the law gives relief to those
					in want. Ought there not, then, to be a law about
					money also, that people shall not borrow from others
					or resort to other people's springs who have not first
					examined their resources at home and brought together, as from little trickles, what is useful and
					necessary to themselves? But now, because of
					their luxury and effeminacy or their extravagance,
					they make no use of what is their own, though they
					possess it, but take from others at a high rate of
					interest, though they have no need of doing so.
					There is strong evidence of this: loans are not
					made to people in need, but to those who wish to
					acquire some superfluity for themselves. And a
					man produces a witness and a surety to aver that,
					
					 
					
					
					since the man has property, he deserves credit,
					whereas, since he has it, he ought not to be
					borrowing.

Why do you pay court to the banker or broker?
					Borrow of your own table ; you have drinking-cups,
					silver dishes, bonbonnières . Pawn these for your
					needs. Beautiful Aulis or Tenedos will adorn your
					table in their stead with pottery that is cleaner than
					the silver ware; it does not have the heavy, disagreeable smell of interest defiling every day like
					rust the surface of your extravagance, nor will it
					keep reminding you of the first of the month and the
					new moon, which, though really the holiest day of the
					month, the money-lenders have made accursed and
					detested. For as to those who, instead of selling
					their belongings, give them as security, not even the
					God of Property could save them. They are ashamed
					to accept a price, but not ashamed to pay interest on
					what is their own. And yet the great Pericles made
					the ornaments of the Goddess, which weighed forty
					talents of refined gold, so that they could be taken
					off, in order, he said, that we may use it for the
						expenses of the war, and then pay back an equal
						amount. And so let us likewise, when we are, as
					it were, besieged by our needs, refuse to admit the
					garrison of a money-lender, our enemy, or to allow
					our property to be sold into slavery. No, let us preserve our liberty by taking off what is useless from
					our table, our bed, our vehicles, and our daily expenses, intending to pay it back if we are fortunate.

Now the Roman women gave their ornaments as
					an offering to Pythian Apollo and from them made the
					
					 
					
					
					golden bowl which was sent to Delphi; and the
					women of Carthage shore their heads and gave their
					hair to make ropes for the tension of machines and
					instruments in defence of their native city. But
					we, ashamed to be independent, enslave ourselves
					by mortgages and notes, when we ought to limit and
					restrict ourselves to actual necessities and from the
					proceeds of the breaking up or the sale of useless
					superfluities to found a sanctuary of Liberty for ourselves, our children, and our wives. The goddess
					Artemis at Ephesus grants to debtors when they take
					refuge in her sanctuary protection and safety from
					their debts, but the protecting and inviolable sanctuary of Frugality is everywhere wide open to sensible
					men, offering them a joyous and honourable expanse
					of plentiful leisure. For just as the Pythian prophetess b in the time of the Persian wars told the Athenians
					that the God offered them a wooden wall, and they,
					giving up their land, their city, their possessions,
					and their houses, took refuge in their ships for the
					sake of liberty, so to us God offers a wooden table, a
					pottery dish, and a coarse cloak if we wish to live as
					free men.
					 Do not abide the attack of the horsemen, 
 
					nor of yoked chariots adorned with horn or silver,
					which rapid interest overtakes and outruns. No,
					make use of any chance donkey or nag and flee from
					your enemy and tyrant, the money-lender, who does
					
					 
					
					
					not, like the Persian, demand earth and water, but
					attacks your liberty and brings suit against your
					honour. If you will not pay him, he duns you; if
					you have funds, he won't accept payment; if you sell,
					he beats down the price; if you will not sell, he forces
					you to do so; if you sue him, he meets you in court;
					if you take your oath, he orders you to do so; if you
					go to his door, he shuts it in your face; if you stay at
					home, he installs himself there and keeps knocking
					at your door.

For what good did Solon do the Athenians when
					he put an end to giving one's person as security for
					debt? For debtors are slaves to all the men who
					ruin them, or rather not to them either (for what
					would be so terrible in that?), but to outrageous,
					barbarous, and savage slaves, like those who Plato
					says stand in Hades as fiery avengers and executioners over those who have been impious in life.
					For these money-lenders make the market-place a
					place of the damned for the wretched debtors; like
					vultures they devour and flay them, entering into
						their entrails, 
 or in other instances they stand
					over them and inflict on them the tortures of
					Tantalus by preventing them from tasting their own
					produce which they reap and harvest. And as
					Dareius sent Datis and Artaphernes against Athens
					with chains and fetters in their hands for their captives, in similar fashion these men, bringing against
					Greece jars full of signatures and notes as fetters,
					march against and through the cities, not, like Triptolemus, sowing beneficent grain, but planting roots of
					debts, roots productive of much toil and much interest
					and hard to escape from, which, as they sprout and
					shoot up round about, press down and strangle the
					
					
					 
					
					
					cities. They say that hares at one and the same
					time give birth to one litter, suckle another, and
					conceive again; but the loans of these barbarous
					rascals give birth to interest before conception ;
					for while they are giving they immediately demand
					payment, while they lay money down they take it
					up, and they lend what they receive for money lent.

There is a saying among the Messenians,
					 Pylos there is before Pylos, and Pylos, a third, there is also, 
 
					but as to the money-lenders we may say
					 Int'rest there is before int'rest, and int'rest a third there is
					also. 
					And then they make a laughing-stock forsooth of the
					scientists, who say that nothing arises out of nothing;
					for with these men interest arises out of that
					which has as yet no being or existence. And they
					think it is a disgrace to be a tax-collector, which
					the law allows; for they themselves lend money
					contrary to law, collecting taxes from their debtors,
					or rather, if the truth is to be told, cheating them in
					the act of lending; for he who receives less than
					the face value of his note is cheated. And yet the
					Persians regard lying as the second among wrongdoings and being in debt as the first ; for lying is
					often practised by debtors; but money-lenders lie
					more than debtors and cheat in their ledgers, when
					they write that they give so-and-so much to so-and-so,
					though they really give less; and the cause of their
					lie is avarice, not necessity or want, but insatiable
					
					 
					
					
					greed, which in the end brings neither enjoyment
					nor profit to them and ruin to those whom they
					wrong. For they do not till the fields which they
					take from their debtors, nor do they live in their
					houses after evicting them, nor do they eat at their
					tables or wear their clothes, but they ruin one man
					first, then hunt a second, using the other as bait.
					For the savage practice spreads like fire, growing
					by the ruin and destruction of those who fall into
					it, consuming one after another. And the moneylender who fans and feeds this fire to the ruin of
					many men gains nothing, except that from time to
					time he can take his account-books and read how
					many men he has sold out, how many he has driven
					from their homes, and, in general, the sources from
					which his hoard of money, rolling in and piling up,
					has made such gains.

And do not think that I say this because I
					have declared war against the money-lenders;
					 Ne'er have they harried my cattle, nor ever made off with
					my horses ; 
					but that I am pointing out to those who are too
					ready to become borrowers how much disgrace and
					servility there is in the practice and that borrowing
					is an act of extreme folly and weakness. Have you
					money? Do not borrow, for you are not in need.
					Have you no money? Do not borrow, for you will
					not be able to pay. Let us look at each of these
					two alternatives separately. Cato once said to an
					old man who was behaving wickedly: Sir, when
						old age has so many evils of its own, why do you add
						to them the disgrace of wickedness? Therefore in
					your own case do not heap up upon poverty, which
					has many attendant evils, the perplexities which
					
					
					 
					
					
					arise from borrowing and owing, and do not deprive
					poverty of the only advantage which it possesses
					over wealth, namely freedom from care; since by
					so doing you will incur the derision of the proverb,
					 I am unable to carry the goat, put the ox then upon me. 
 
					Being unable to carry the burden of poverty you
					put the money-lender upon your back, a burden difficult for even the rich to bear. How, then, am I
						to live? Do you ask this, when you have hands
					and feet and a voice, when you are a man capable
					of loving and being loved, of doing favours and being
					grateful for them? Live by teaching letters, by
					leading children to school, by being a door-keeper,
					by working as a sailor or a boatman; none of these
					is so disgraceful or disagreeable as hearing the order
					 Pay up.

The well-known Roman Rutilius went up to
					Musonius and said, Musonius, Zeus the Saviour,
						whom you imitate and emulate, is no borrower ;
					and Musonius answered with a smile, He is no
						lender, either. For Rutilius, who was himself a
					lender, was finding fault with Musonius for borrowing. This is an example of the vanity of the Stoics;
					for why should you bring in Zeus the Saviour, when
					you can use as examples things that are here before
					your eyes? Swallows do not borrow, ants do not
					borrow, creatures upon which nature has bestowed
					neither hands, reason, nor art; but men, with their
					superior intellect, support through their ingenuity
					horses, dogs, partridges, hares, and jackdaws in
					addition to themselves. Why, then, have you come
					to the poor opinion of yourself, that you are less
					
					 
					
					
					persuasive than a jackdaw, more dumb than a
					partridge, less well-born than a dog, so that you can
					obtain no help from any human being by waiting
					on him, entertaining him, guarding him, or fighting
					for him? Do you not see how many opportunities
					are offered on land and on the sea?
					 Lo, even Miccylus I beheld, 
 
					says Crates,
					 
 Carding the wool, and his wife too carding the wool along
					with him,
					 
 Striving in terrible conflict to 'scape from the onslaught of
					famine. 
 
					King Antigonus asked Cleanthes, when he met him
					in Athens after not seeing him for a while, Are
						you still grinding corn, Cleanthes? 
 Yes, Your
							Majesty, he replied; I do it in order not to be
								a deserter from Zeno's instruction, nor from philosophy either. What a great spirit the man had
					who came from the mill and the kneading-trough,
					and with the hand which ground the flour and
					baked the bread wrote about the gods, the moon,
					the stars, and the sun! But to us such labours seem
					slavish. And therefore, in order to be free, we
					contract debts and pay court to men who are
					ruiners of homes, we act as bodyguard to them, dine
					them, make them presents, and pay them tribute,
					not because of our poverty (for no one lends to
					poor men), but because of our extravagance. For
					if we were content with the necessaries of life,
					
					 
					
					
					the race of money-lenders would be as non-existent
					as that of Centaurs and Gorgons; but luxury produced money-lenders just as it did goldsmiths, silversmiths, perfumers, and dyers in gay colours; for
					our debts are incurred, not to pay for bread or wine,
					but for country-seats, slaves, mules, banquet-halls,
					and tables, and because we give shows to the cities
					with unrestrained expenditure, contending in fruitless and thankless rivalries. But the man who is
					once involved remains a debtor all his life, exchanging, like a horse that has once been bridled, one
					rider for another. And there is no escape to those
					former pastures and meadows, but they wander
					like the spirits described by Empedocles, who have
					been expelled by the gods and thrown out from
					heaven:
					 
 Into the waves of the sea they are driv'n by the might of the
					ether;
					 
 Then on the floor of the earth the sea vomits them; earth
					then ejects them
					 
 Into the untiring sun's rays; and he hurls them to eddying
					ether. 
 
 
					And so one after another takes over 
 the borrower, first a usurer or broker of Corinth, then one
					of Patrae, then an Athenian, until, attacked on all
					sides by all of them, he is dissolved and chopped up
					into the small change of interest payments. For
					just as a man who has fallen into the mire must
					either get up or stay where he is, but he who turns
					and rolls over covers his wet and drenched person
					with more dirt; so in their transfers and changes
					of loans, by assuming additional interest payments
					
					 
					
					
					and plastering themselves with them, they weigh
					themselves down more and more; and they are
					much like persons ill with cholera, who do not accept
					treatment, but vomit up the prescribed medicine
					and then continue constantly to collect more disease.
					Similarly these borrowers refuse to be purged, and
					always, at every season of the year, when painfully
					and with convulsions they cough up the interest
					while another payment immediately accrues and
					presses upon them, they suffer a fresh attack of
					nausea and headache. What they ought to do is
					to get rid of debts and become healthy and free
					again.

From now on my words are addressed to those
					who are more well-to-do and accustomed to a softer
					way of living, those who say Am I, then, to be
						without slaves, without hearth and home? , as if a
					sick man who is swollen up with dropsy should say
					to his physician Am I, then, to be made thin and
						empty? Why not, to make you get well? And
					so you should do without slaves, that you may not
					be a slave yourself, and without property, that you
					may not be the property of another. Hear the tale
					of the vultures: One of them had an attack of
					vomiting and said he was spewing out bowels, but
					the other, who was there, said What harm is there
						in that? For you are not spewing out your own
						bowels, but those of the corpse we tore to pieces
						a little while ago. So any man in debt sells, not
					his own plot of land, nor his own house, but those
					of his creditor whom by law he has made their
					owner. Not so, by Zeus, he says; why, my father
						left me this field. Yes, and your father left you
					your liberty and your civil rights, which you ought
					
					
					 
					
					
					to value more. So, too, he who begat you made
					your foot and your hand, but when it is mortified,
					you pay a surgeon for cutting it off. Calypso clothed
					Odysseus in her garment, putting fragrant raiment
						upon him 
 that breathed of her divine person,
					as a gift and a memento of her love; but when he
					was capsized and engulfed by the waves and could
					hardly keep himself up since the garment had become soaked and heavy, he took it off and threw it
					from him, then, binding a wimple about his naked
					breast,
					 Long-shore he swam looking landward, 
 
					and when he reached safety he had no lack of garment or food. Well, then, is it not a tempest that
					arises about debtors when the lender after a while
					comes up to them saying Pay ?
					 
 Thus having spoken he gathered the clouds and stirred up
					the great waters;
					 
 East wind and South wind and West with furious blasts
					raged together, 
 
 
					as interest rolled up upon interest; and the debtor,
					overwhelmed, continues to clutch them as they weigh
					him down, for he cannot swim away and escape;
					no, he sinks down to the bottom and disappears
					along with the friends who have endorsed his notes.
					Crates the Theban, when he was not pressed for
					payment and did not even owe anything, because
					he disliked the mere administration of property,
					its cares and distractions, abandoned an estate
					valued at eight talents and, donning cloak and
					wallet, took refuge in philosophy and poverty.
					Anaxagoras also left his land to be grazed over by
					
					 
					
					
					sheep. But what need is there of mentioning these
					men, when Philoxenus the lyric poet, who shared
					in the allotment of lands in a colony in Sicily, which
					ensured him a livelihood and a household furnished
					with abundant resources, when he saw that luxury,
					indulgence in a life of pleasure, and lack of culture
					were prevalent there, said, By the Gods, these
						good things shall not make me lose myself; I will
						rather lose them, and leaving his allotment to
					others, he sailed away. But people in debt are
					content to be dunned, mulcted of tribute, enslaved,
					and cheated; they endure, like Phineus, to feed
					winged harpies which carry off their food and devour
					it, buying their grain, not at the proper season, but
					before it is harvested, and purchasing the oil before
					the olives have been plucked. And I have wine, 
					says the borrower, at such and such a price, and
					he gives his note for its value; but the cluster still
					hangs clinging on the vine and waiting for the rising
					of Arcturus.