PAMPHILUS 
Where have you been, Lycinus, and what are you
laughing at, I should like to know, as you come?
Of course, you are always in a good humour, but this
appears to me to be something out of the ordinary,
as you cannot restrain your laughter over it.
 
 LYCINUS 
I have been in the Agora, I’d have you know,
Pamphilus; and I shall make you share my laughter
at once if you let me tell you what sort of case has
been tried in my presence, between philosophers
wrangling with each other.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
Well, what you have already said is laughable, in
all truth, that followers of philosophy should have it
out with one another at law, when they ought, even
if it should be something of importance, to settle their
complaints peaceably among themselves.

LYCINUS 
Indeed, you blessed simpleton! Peaceably! They!
Why, they came together at full tilt and flung whole
cartloads of abuse upon each other, shouting and
straining their lungs enough to split them!

 

 PAMPHILUS 
No doubt, Lycinus, they were bickering about their
doctrines, as usual, being of different sects?
 
 LYCINUS 
Not at all; this was something different, for they
were of the same sect and agreed in their doctrines.
Nevertheless, a trial had been arranged, and the
judges, endowed with the deciding vote, were the
most prominent and oldest and wisest men in the
city, in whose presence one would have been ashamed
even to strike a false note, let alone resorting to such
shamelessness.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
Then do please tell me at once the point at issue
in the trial, so that I may know what it is that has
stirred up so much laughter in you.

LYCINUS 
Well, Pamphilus, the Emperor has established, as
you know, an allowance, not inconsiderable, for the
philosophers according to sect—the Stoics, I mean,
the Platonics, and the Epicureans; also those of the
Walk, the same amount for each of these. It was
stipulated that when one of them died another should
be appointed in his stead, after being approved by
vote of the first citizens. And the prize was not “a
shield of hide or a victim,” as the poet has it, but a
matter of ten thousand drachmas a year, for instructing boys.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
I know all that; and one of them died, they say,
recently—one of the two Peripatetics, I think.


 

 LYCINUS 
That, Pamphilus, is the Helen for whom they were
meeting each other in single combat. And up to
this point there was nothing to laugh at except perhaps that men rah to be philosophers and to
despise lucre should fight for it as if for imperilled
fatherland, ancestral fanes, and graves of forefathers.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
Yes, but that is the doctrine of the Peripatetics,
not to despise wealth vehemently but to think it a
third “supreme good.”
 
 LYCINUS 
Right you are; they do say that, and the war
that they were waging was on traditional lines.

But
listen now to the sequel.
Many competitors took part in the funeral games
of the deceased, but two of them in particular were
the most favoured to win, the aged Diocles (you
know the man I mean, the dialectician) and Bagoas,
the one who is reputed to be a eunuch. The matter
of doctrines had been thrashed out between them
already, and each had displayed his familiarity with
their tenets and his adherence to Aristotle and his
placita; and by Zeus neither of them had the better
of it.

The close of the trial, however, took a new
turn; Diocles, discontinuing the advertisement of
his own merits, passed over to Bagoas and made a
great effort to show up his private life, and Bagoas
met this attack by exploring the history of Diocles
in like manner.

 

 PAMPHILUS 
Naturally, Lycinus ; and the greater part, certainly,
of their discussion ought rather to have centred upon
that. For my own part, if I had chanced to be a
judge, I should have dwelt most, I think, upon that
sort of thing, trying to ascertain which led the better
life rather than which was the better prepared in the
tenets themselves, and deeming him more suitable
to win.

LYCINUS 
Well said, and you have me voting with you in this.
But when they had their fill of hard words, and their
fill of caustic observations, Diocles at length said in
conclusion that it was not at all permissible for
Bagoas to lay claim to philosophy and the rewards
of merit in it, since he was a eunuch; such people
ought to be excluded, he thought, not simply from
all that but even from temples and holy-water bowls
and all the places of public assembly, and he declared
it an ill-omened, ill-met sight if on first leaving home
in the morning, one should set eyes on any such
person. He had a great deal to say, too, on that
score, observing that a eunuch was neither man nor
woman but something composite, hybrid, and
monstrous, alien to human nature.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
The charge you tell of, Lycinus, is novel, anyhow,
and now I too, my friend, am moved to laughter,
hearing of this incredible accusation. Well, what
of the other? Held his peace, did he not? Or did
he venture to say something himself in reply to this?

LYCINUS 
At first, through shame and cowardice—for that
sort of behaviour is natural to them—he remained
silent a long while and blushed and was plainly in a
sweat, but finally in a weak, effeminate voice he said
that Diocles was acting unjustly in trying to exclude
a eunuch from philosophy, in which even women had
a part; and he brought in Aspasia, Diotima, and
Thargelia to support his also a certain Academic
eunuch hailing from among the Pelasgians, who shortly
before our time achieved a high reputation among
the Greeks. But if that person himself were alive
and advanced similar claims, Diocles would (he
said) have excluded him too, undismayed by his
reputation among the common sort ; and he repeated
a number of humorous remarks made to the man by
Stoics and Cynics regarding his physical imperfection.

That was what the judges dwelt upon, and the point
thenceforward at issue was whether the seal of approval
should be set upon a eunuch who was proposing himself for a career in philosophy and requesting that
the governance of boys be committed to him. One





 

said that presence and a fine physical endowment
should be among the attributes of a philosopher, and
that above all else he should have a long beard that
would inspire confidence in those who visited him
and sought to become his pupils, one that would
befit the ten thousand drachmas which he was to
receive from the Emperor, whereas a eunuch was in
worse case than a cut priest, for the latter had at
least known manhood once, but the former had been
marred from the very first and was an ambiguous sort
of creature like a crow, which cannot be reckoned
either with doves or with ravens.

The other pleaded
that this was not a physical examination; that there
should be an investigation of soul and mind and
knowledge of doctrines. Then Aristotle was cited
as a witness to support his case, since he tremendously
admired the eunuch Hermias, the tyrant of Atarneus,
to the point of celebrating sacrifices to him in the
same way as to the gods. Moreover, Bagoas ventured
to add an observation to the effect that a eunuch was
a far more suitable teacher for the young, since he
could not incur any blame as regards them and would
not incur that charge against Socrates of leading the
youngsters astray. And as he had been ridiculed
especially for his beardlessness, he despatched this
shaft to good effect—he thought so, anyhow: “If
it is by length of beard that philosophers are to be
judged, a he-goat would with greater justice be given
preference to all of them!”

At this juncture a third person who was present—
his name may remain in obscurity—said: “As a
matter of fact, gentlemen, if this fellow, so smooth


 

of jowl, effeminate in voice, and otherwise similar to
a eunuch, should strip, you would find him very
masculine. Unless those who talk about him are
lying, he was once taken in adultery, commissis
membris, as the table of the law says. At that time
he secured his acquittal by resorting to the name of
eunuch and finding sanctuary in it, since the judges
on that occasion discredited the accusation from the
very look of him. Now, however, he may recant, I
suppose, for the sake of the pelf that is in view.”

Upon those remarks everyone began to laugh, as
was natural, while Bagoas fell into greater confusion
and. was beside himself, turning all colours of the
rainbow and dripping with cold sweat. On the one
hand, he did not think it seemly to plead guilty to
the charge of adultery; yet, on the other, he thought
that this accusation would not be without its usefulness for the case then in progress.
 
 PAMPHILUS 
This is truly laughable, Lycinus, and must have
given you uncommon diversion. But what was the
outcome, and how did the judges decide about them?

LYCINUS 
They were not all of the same opinion. Some
thought they ought to strip him, as is done with
slaves, and determine by inspection whether he had
the parts to practise philosophy. Others made the
suggestion, even more ridiculous, that they should
send for some women out of bawdy-houses and bid
him consort with them and cohabit; and that one
of the judges, the eldest and most trustworthy,

 

should stand by and see whether he could practise
philosophy! Then, as all were overcome by laughter
and every man of them had a sore belly from shaking
with it, they decided to refer the case to the highest
court and send it to Italy.

Now, one of the pair is training, they say, for a
demonstration of his eloquence, making his preparations, and composing an accusation. Morever, he
is delicately putting forward the charge of adultery
again, thereby acting in direct contradiction to himself, like a bad lawyer, and enrolling his opponent
among fully enfranchised males through his accusation. As to Bagoas, he, they say, has different
concerns, assiduously demonstrating his powers,
keeping his case in hand, and, in sum, hoping to win
if he can show that he is not a bit inferior to a jack
at service. This, my friend, is apparently the best
criterion of devotion to wisdom, and an irrefutable
demonstration. Consequently, I may well pray that
my son (who is still quite young) may be suitably
endowed for the practise of philosophy with other
tools than brain or tongue.