“Nothing sweeter than one’s native land” 
 
 Odyss. 9, 34 
is
already a commonplace. If nothing is sweeter, then
is anything more holy and divine? Truly of all that
men count holy and divine their native land is cause
‘and teacher, in that she bears, nurtures and educates
them. To be sure, many admire cities for their size,
their splendour and the magnificence of their public
works, but everyone loves his own country; and
even among men completely overmastered by the
lust of the eye, no one is so misguided as to be forgetful of it because of the greater number of wonders
in other countries.

Therefore a man who prides
himself on being citizen of a prosperous state does
not know, it seems to me, what sort of honour one
should pay his native land, and such an one would
clearly take it ill if his lot had fallen in a less
pretentious place. For my part I prefer to honour
the mere name of native land. In attempting to
compare states, it is proper, of course, to investigate
their size and beauty and the abundance of their supplies; but when it is a question of choosing between
them, nobody would choose the more splendid and
give up his own. He would pray that it too might
be as prosperous as any, but would choose it, no matter
what it was. Upright children and good fathers do



 

just the same thing. A lad of birth and breeding
would not honour anyone else above his father, and
a father would not neglect his son and cherish some
other lad. In fact, fathers, influenced by their
affection, give their sons so much more than their
due that they think them the best-looking, the
tallest and the most accomplished in every way.
One who does not judge his son in this spirit does
not seem to me to have a father’s eyes.

In the first place, then, the name of fatherland
is closer to one’s heart than all else, for there is
nothing closer than a father. If one pays his father
proper honour, as law and nature direct, then one
should honour his fatherland still more, for his father
himself belonged to if and his father’s father and all
their forbears, and the name of father goes back
until it reaches the father-gods.

Even the gods
have countries that they rejoice in, and although
they watch over all the abodes of man, deeming that
every land and every sea is theirs, nevertheless each
honours the place in which he was born above all
other states. Cities are holier when they are homes
of gods, and islands more divine if legends are told
of the birth of gods in them. Indeed, sacrifices
are accounted pleasing to the gods when one goes to
their native places to perform the ceremony. If, then,
the name of native land is in honour with the gods,
should it not be far more so with mankind?

Each
of us had his first sight of the sun from his native
land, and so that god, universal though he be, is
nevertheless accounted by everyone a home-god, because of the place from which he saw him first.
Moreover, each of us began to speak there, learning


 

first to talk his native dialect, and came to know the
gods there. If a man’s lot has been cast in such a
land that he has required another for his higher
education, he should still be thankful for these early
teachings, for he would not have known even the
meaning of “state” if his country had not taught
him that there was such a thing.

The reason, I take it, for which men amass
education and learning is that they may thereby
make themselves more useful to their native land,
and they likewise acquire riches out of ambition to
contribute to its common funds. With reason, I
think: for men should not be ungrateful when
they have received the greatest favours. On the
contrary, if a man returns thanks to individuals,
as is right, when he has been well treated by
them, much more should he requite his country
with its due. To wrong one’s parents is against the
law of the different states; but counting our native
land the common mother of us all, we should give
her thank-offerings for our nurture and for our
knowledge of the law itself.

No one was ever known to be so forgetful of
his country as to care nothing for it when he was
in another state. No, those who get on badly in
foreign parts continually cry out that one’s own
country is the greatest of all blessings, while those
who get on well, however successful they may be in all
else, think that they lack one thing at least, a thing
of the greatest importance, in that they do not live
in their own country but sojourn in a strange land ; for
thus to sojourn is a reproach! And men who during
their years abroad have, become illustrious through
acquirement of wealth, through renown from office-


 

holding, through testimony to their culture, or
through praise of their bravery, can be seen hurrying
one and all to their native land, as if they thought
they could not anywhere else find better people
before whom to display the evidences of their
success. The more a man is esteemed elsewhere,
the more eager is he to regain his own country.

Even the young love their native land; but
aged men, being wiser, love it more. In fact, every
aged man yearns and prays to end his life in it,
that there in the place where he began to live he
may

€posit his body in the earth which nurtured
him: and may share the graves of his fathers. He
thinks it a calamity to be guilty of being an
alien even after death, through lying buried in a
strange land.

How much affection real, true citizens have
for their native land can be learned only among a
people sprung from the soil. Newcomers, being but
bastard children, as it were, transfer their allegiance
easily, since they neither know nor love the name of
native land, but expect to be well provided with the
necessities of life wherever they may be,1
 measuring
happiness by their appetites! On the other hand,
those who have a real mother-country love the soil
on which they were born and bred, even if they own
but little of it, and that be rough and thin. Though
they be hard put to it to praise the soil, they will not
lack words to extol their country. Indeed, when
they see others priding themselves on their open
plains and prairies diversified with all manner of
growing things, they themselves do not forget the


 
 

merits of their own country, and pass over its fitness
for breeding horses to praise its fitness for breeding
men.

One hastens to his native land though he be
an islander, and though he could lead a life of ease
elsewhere. If immortality be offered him he will not
accept it, preferring a grave in his native land, and
the smoke thereof is brighter to his eyes than fire
elsewhere.

To such an extent do all men seem to prize
their own country that lawgivers everywhere, as one
may note, have prescribed exile as the severest
penalty for the greatest transgressions. And it cannot be said that in this view lawgivers differ from
commanders. On the contrary, in battle no other
exhortation of the marshalled men is so effective as
“You are fighting for your native land!” No man
who hears this is willing to be a coward, for the
name of native land makes even the dastard brave.