Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the commandment
of God our Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope;

to Timothy, my true child in faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

As I exhorted you to stay at Ephesus when I was going into
Macedonia, that you might charge certain men not to teach a different
doctrine,

neither to pay attention to myths and endless
genealogies, which cause disputes, rather than God's stewardship, which
is in faith --

but the end of the charge is love, out of a pure
heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith;

from which
things some, having missed the mark, have turned aside to vain talking;

desiring to be teachers of the law, though they understand
neither what they say, nor about what they strongly affirm.

But
we know that the law is good, if a man uses it lawfully,

as
knowing this, that law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy
and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for
manslayers,

for the sexually immoral, for homosexuals, for
slave-traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for any other thing
contrary to the sound doctrine;

according to the gospel of the
glory of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust.

And I
thank him who enabled me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he counted me
faithful, appointing me to service;

although I was before a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and insolent. However, I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.

The grace of our Lord
abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

The saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

However, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus
Christ might display all his patience, for an example of those who were
going to believe in him for eternal life.

Now to the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, to God who alone is wise, be honor and
glory forever and ever. Amen.

This charge I commit to you, my child Timothy, according to
the prophecies which led the way to you, that by them you may wage the
good warfare;

holding faith and a good conscience; which some
having thrust away made a shipwreck concerning the faith;

of
whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I delivered to Satan, that they
might be taught not to blaspheme.

I exhort therefore, first of all, that petitions, prayers,
intercessions, and givings of thanks, be made for all men:

for
kings and all who are in high places; that we may lead a tranquil and
quiet life in all godliness and reverence.

For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior;

who desires all people
to be saved and come to full knowledge of the truth.

For there is
one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

who gave himself as a ransom for all; the testimony in its own
times;

to which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle (I am
telling the truth in Christ, not lying), a teacher of the Gentiles in
faith and truth.

I desire therefore that the men in every place pray, lifting
up holy hands without wrath and doubting.

In the same way, that
women also adorn themselves in decent clothing, with modesty and
propriety; not just with braided hair, gold, pearls, or expensive
clothing;

but (which becomes women professing godliness) with
good works.

Let a woman learn in quietness with all subjection.

But I don't permit a woman to teach, nor to exercise authority
over a man, but to be in quietness.

For Adam was first formed,
then Eve.

Adam wasn't deceived, but the woman, being deceived,
has fallen into disobedience;

but she will be saved through her
child-bearing, if they continue in faith, love, and sanctification with
sobriety.

This is a faithful saying: if a man seeks the office of an
overseer, he desires a good work.

The overseer therefore must be
without reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, sensible, modest,
hospitable, good at teaching;

not a drinker, not violent, not
greedy for money, but gentle, not quarrelsome, not covetous;

one
who rules his own house well, having children in subjection with all
reverence;

(but if a man doesn't know how to rule his own house,
how will he take care of the assembly of God?)

not a new convert,
lest being puffed up he fall into the same condemnation as the devil.

Moreover he must have good testimony from those who are outside,
to avoid falling into reproach and the snare of the devil.

Deacons, in the same way, must be reverent, not
double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for money;

holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.

Let them
also first be tested; then let them serve as deacons, if they are
blameless.

Their wives in the same way must be reverent, not
slanderers, temperate, faithful in all things.

Let deacons be
husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.

For those who have served well as deacons gain to themselves a
good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

These things I write to you, hoping to come to you shortly;

but if I wait long, that you may know how men ought to behave
themselves in the house of God, which is the assembly of the living
God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

Without controversy,
the mystery of godliness is great:
God was revealed in the flesh,
 Justified in the spirit,
 Seen by angels,
 Preached among the nations,
 Believed on in the world,
 And received up in glory.

But the Spirit says expressly that in later times some will
fall away from the faith, paying attention to seducing spirits and
doctrines of demons,

through the hypocrisy of men who speak lies,
branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron;

forbidding
marriage and commanding to abstain from foods which God created to be
received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.

For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected,
if it is received with thanksgiving.

For it is sanctified through
the word of God and prayer.

If you instruct the brothers of these
things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished in the
words of the faith, and of the good doctrine which you have followed.

But refuse profane and old wives' fables. Exercise yourself
toward godliness.

For bodily exercise has some value, but
godliness has value for all things, having the promise of the life
which is now, and of that which is to come.

This saying is
faithful and worthy of all acceptance.

For to this end we both
labor and suffer reproach, because we have set our trust in the living
God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe.

Command and teach these things.

Let no man despise your youth; but be an example to those who
believe, in word, in your way of life, in love, in spirit, in faith,
and in purity.

Until I come, pay attention to reading, to
exhortation, and to teaching.

Don't neglect the gift that is in
you, which was given to you by prophecy, with the laying on of the
hands of the elders.

Be diligent in these things. Give yourself
wholly to them, that your progress may be revealed to all.

Pay
attention to yourself, and to your teaching. Continue in these things,
for in doing this you will save both yourself and those who hear you.

Don't rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father; the
younger men as brothers;

the elder women as mothers; the younger
as sisters, in all purity.

Honor widows who are widows indeed.

But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn
first to show piety towards their own family, and to repay their
parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.

Now she who
is a widow indeed, and desolate, has her hope set on God, and continues
in petitions and prayers night and day.

But she who gives herself
to pleasure is dead while she lives.

Also command these things,
that they may be without reproach.

But if anyone doesn't provide
for his own, and especially his own household, he has denied the faith,
and is worse than an unbeliever.

Let no one be enrolled as a
widow under sixty years old, having been the wife of one man,

being approved by good works, if she has brought up children, if she
has been hospitable to strangers, if she has washed the saints' feet,
if she has relieved the afflicted, and if she has diligently followed
every good work.

But refuse younger widows, for when they have grown wanton
against Christ, they desire to marry;

having condemnation,
because they have rejected their first pledge.

Besides, they
also learn to be idle, going about from house to house. Not only idle,
but also gossips and busybodies, saying things which they ought not.

I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear children,
rule the household, and give no occasion to the adversary for reviling.

For already some have turned aside after Satan.

If any
man or woman who believes has widows, let them relieve them, and don't
let the assembly be burdened; that it might relieve those who are
widows indeed.

Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching.

For the Scripture says, "You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out
the grain." And, "The laborer is worthy of his wages."

Don't receive an accusation against an elder, except at the
word of two or three witnesses.

Those who sin, reprove in the
sight of all, that the rest also may be in fear.

I charge you in
the sight of God, and Christ Jesus, and the elect angels, that you
observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality.

Lay hands hastily on no one, neither be a participant in other
men's sins. Keep yourself pure.

Be no longer a drinker of water
only, but use a little wine for your stomach's sake and your frequent
infirmities.

Some men's sins are evident, preceding them to judgment, and
some also follow later.

In the same way also there are good
works that are obvious, and those that are otherwise can't be hidden.

Let as many as are bondservants under the yoke count their own
masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and the doctrine not
be blasphemed.

Those who have believing masters, let them not
despise them, because they are brothers, but rather let them serve
them, because those who partake of the benefit are believing and
beloved. Teach and exhort these things.

If anyone teaches a different doctrine, and doesn't consent to
sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine
which is according to godliness,

he is conceited, knowing
nothing, but obsessed with arguments, disputes, and word battles, from
which come envy, strife, reviling, evil suspicions,

constant
friction of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, who
suppose that godliness is a means of gain. Withdraw yourself from such.

But godliness with contentment is great gain.

For we
brought nothing into the world, and we certainly can't carry anything
out.

But having food and clothing, we will be content with that.

But those who are determined to be rich fall into a temptation
and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts, such as drown men in
ruin and destruction.

For the love of money is a root of all
kinds of evil. Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed,
and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

But you, man of God, flee these things, and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and gentleness.

Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold of the eternal life to which
you were called, and you confessed the good confession in the sight of
many witnesses.

I charge you before God, who gives life to all
things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate testified
the good confession,

that you keep the commandment without spot,
blameless, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ;

which
in its own times he will show, who is the blessed and only Ruler, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords;

who alone has immortality,
dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor can see: to
whom be honor and eternal power. Amen.

Charge those who are rich in this present world that they not
be haughty, nor have their hope set on the uncertainty of riches, but
on the living God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy;

that they do good, that they be rich in good works, that they be
ready to distribute, willing to communicate;

laying up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold of eternal life.

Timothy, guard that which is committed to you, turning away
from the empty chatter and oppositions of the knowledge which is
falsely so called;

which some professing have erred concerning
the faith. Grace be with you. Amen.