You ask, my boy, how you can get to be a public
speaker, and be held to personify the sublime and
glorious name of sophist; life, you say, is not worth
living, unless when you speak you can clothe
yourself in such a mantle of eloquence that you
will be irresistible and invincible, that you will be
admired and stared at by everyone, counting among
the Greeks as a highly desirable treat for their ears.
Consequently, you wish to find out what the roads
are that lead to this goal. Come, I have no desire to
be churlish, lad, especially when a mere youngster who
craves what is noblest, not knowing how to come by
it, draws near and asks, as you do now, for advice—
a sacred matter. So listen; and in so far as it lies
in my power, you may have great confidence that
soon you will be an able hand at discerning what
requires to be said and expressing it in words, if only
you on your part are willing henceforth to abide by
what I tell you, to practise it industriously, and
to follow the road resolutely until you reach your
goal.

Certainly the object of your quest is not trivial,
nor one that calls for little effort, but rather one
for which it is worth while to work hard, to scant
your sleep, and to put up with anything whatsoever.


 

Just see how many who previously were nobodies
have come to be accounted men of standing, millionaires, yes, even gentlemen, because of their
eloquence.

Do not be daunted, however, and do
not be dismayed at the greatness of your expectations, thinking to undergo untold labours before
you achieve them. I shall not conduct you by a
rough road, or a steep and sweaty one, so that you
will turn back halfway out of weariness. In that
case I should be no better than those other guides
who use the customary route—long, steep, toilsome,
and, as a rule, hopeless. No, my advice has this to
commend it, that ascending in the manner of a
leisurely stroll through flowery fields and perfect
shade in great comfort and luxury by a sloping
bridle-path that is very short as well as very pleasant,
you will gain the summit without sweating for it,
you will bag your game without any effort, yes, by
Heaven, you will banquet at your ease, looking
down from the height at those who went the other
way as they creep painfully upward over sheer and
slippery crags, still in the foot-hills of the ascent,
rolling off head-first from time to time, and getting
many a wound on the sharp rocks—and you, the
while, on the top long before them, with a wreath
upon your head, will be fortunate beyond compare,
for you will have acquired from Rhetoric in an
instant, all but in your sleep, every single blessing
that there is!

Yes, my promise goes to that extent in its
generosity ; but in the name of Friendship do
not disbelieve me, when I say that I shall show



 

you that its attainment is at once easy and pleasant.
Why should you? Hesiod was given a leaf or two
from Helicon, and at once he became a poet instead
of a shepherd and sang the pedigrees of gods and
heroes under the inspiration of the Muses. Is it
impossible, then, to become a public speaker —something far inferior to the grand style of poetry—in
an instant, if one could find out the quickest way?

Just to show you, I should like to tell you the
tale of a Sidonian merchant's idea which disbelief
made ineffectual and profitless to the man who heard
it. Alexander was then ruler of the Persians,
having deposed Darius after the battle of Arbela,
and postmen had to run to every quarter of the
realm carrying Alexander’s orders. The journey
from Persia to Egypt was long, since one had to
make a detour about the mountains, then to go
through Babylonia to Arabia, and then to traverse
a wide expanse of desert before reaching Egypt at
last, after spending in this way, even if one travelled
light, twenty very long days on the road. Well,
this annoyed Alexander, because he had heard that
the Egyptians were showing signs of disaffection,
and he was unable to be expeditious in transmitting
his decisions concerning them to his governors.
At that juncture the Sidonian merchant said: “I
give you my word, King Alexander, to show you a
short route from Persia to Egypt. If a man went
over these mountains—and he could do it in three


 

days—he is in Egypt in no time!” And it was so!
Alexander, however, put no faith in it, but thought
that the merchant was a liar. So true is it that
amazing promises seem untrustworthy to most
people.

But you must not make the same mistake.
Experience will convince you that nothing can prevent you from arriving as a public speaker, in a single
day, and not a full day at that, by flying across the
mountains from Persia to Egypt! 

 
I wish first of all to paint you a picture in words,
like Cebes of old, and show you both the roads;
for there are two that lead to Lady Rhetoric, of
whom you seem to me exceedingly enamoured. So
let her be sitting upon a high place, very fair of
face and form, holding in her right hand the Horn
of Plenty, which runs over with all manner of fruits.
Beside her imagine, pray, that you see Wealth
standing, all golden and lovely. Let Fame, too,
and Power stand by; and let Compliments, resembling tiny Cupids, swarm all about her on the
wing in great numbers from every side. If you
have ever seen the Nile represented in a painting,
lying on the back of a crocodile or a hippopotamus,
such as are frequent in his stream, while tiny infants
play beside him—the Egyptians call them cubits—
the Compliments that surround Rhetoric are like
these. 

 
Now you, her lover, approach, desiring, of course,




 

to get upon the summit with all speed in order to
marry her when you get there, and to possess all
that she has—the Wealth, the Fame, the Compliments; for by law everything accrues to the
husband.

Then when you draw near the mountain,
at first you despair of climbing it, and the thing
seems to you just as Aornus looked to the Macedonians when they observed that it was precipitous
on every side, truly far from easy even for a bird to
fly over, calling for a Dionysus or a Heracles if it
were ever going to be taken. 

 
That is how it seems to you at first; and then,
after a little, you see two roads. To be more exact,
one of them is but a path, narrow, briery, and rough,
promising great thirstiness and sweat; Hesiod has
been beforehand with us and has already described
it very carefully, so that I shall not need to do so. 
The other, however, is level, flowery, and wellwatered, just as I described it a moment ago, not
to detain you by saying the same things over and
over when you might even now be a speaker.

But
I must add at least this much, that the rough, steep
road used not to have many tracks of wayfarers, and
whatever tracks there were, were very old. I myself, unlucky dog, got up by that road and did all
that hard work without any need; but as the other
was level and had no windings at all, I could see
from a distance what it was like without having
travelled it myself. You see, being still young, I
could not discern what was better, but believed that
poet to be telling the truth when he said that





 

blessings were engendered of toil. That was not
so, however; at all events, I notice that most
people are accorded greater returns without any
labour, through their felicitous choice of words and
ways. 

 
But, to resume—when you reach the starting-point, I am sure that you will be in doubt, and
indeed are even now in doubt, which road to follow.
I propose, therefore, to tell you how to do now
in order to mount to the highest peak with the
greatest ease, to be fortunate, to bring off the
marriage, and to be accounted wonderful by everyone. It is quite enough that I should have been
duped and should have worked hard. For you,
let everything grow “without sowing and without
ploughing,” as in the time of Cronus.

On the instant, then, you will be approached by
a vigorous man with hard muscles and a manly
stride, who shows heavy tan on his body, and is
bold-eyed and alert. He is the guide of the rough
road, and he will talk a lot of nonsense to you, the
poor simpleton. In exhorting you to follow him, he
will point out the footprints of Demosthenes and
of Plato, and one or two more—great prints, I grant
you, too great for men of nowadays, but for the
most part dim and indistinct through lapse of time ;
and he will say that you will have good fortune and
will contract a lawful marriage with Rhetoric if you




 

follow these footprints like a rope-dancer; but if
you should make even a slight mis-step, or set your
foot out of them, or let your weight sway you
somewhat to one side, you will fall from the direct
road that leads to the marriage. Then he will tell
you to imitate those ancient worthies, and will set
you fusty models for your speeches, far from easy to
copy, resembling sculptures in the early manner
such as those of Hegesias and of Critius and Nesiotes 
—wasp-waisted, sinewy, hard, meticulously definite
in their contours. And he will say that hard work,
scant sleep, abstention from wine, and untidiness are
necessary and indispensable; it is impossible, says
he, to get over the road without them. What is
most vexatious of all, even the time which he
will prescribe to you for the journey will be very
long——many years, for he counts not by days and
months, but by whole Olympic cycles, so that you
will be foredone in advance as you listen and will
forswear your project, bidding a fond farewell to
the good fortune that you expected. Besides, he
demands no small fee for all these hardships; in
fact, he would not guide you unless he should get a
huge sum in advance.

That is what this man will say, the impostor, the
absolute old fogey, the antediluvian, who displays
dead men of a bygone age to serve as patterns, and
expects you to dig up long-buried speeches as if they
were something tremendously helpful, wanting you to
emulate the son of a sword-maker, and some other



 

fellow, the son of a school-master named Atrometus, 
and that too in times of peace, when no Philip is
making raids and no Alexander issuing orders—situations in which their speeches were perhaps considered
useful. He does not know what a short, easy road,
direct to Rhetoric, has recently been opened. But do
not you believe or heed him for fear he may give you
a neck-breaking tumble somewhere after he gets
you in charge, or may in the end make you prematurely old with your labours. No, if you are
unquestionably in love, and wish to marry Rhetoric
forthwith, while you are still in your prime, so that
she may be fond of you, do bid a long good-bye to
that hairy, unduly masculine fellow, leaving him to
climb up himself, all blown and dripping with sweat,
and lead up what others he can delude.

If you turn to the other road, you will find many
people, and among them a wholly clever and wholly
handsome gentleman with a mincing gait, a thin
neck, a languishing eye, and a honeyed voice, who
distils perfume, scratches his head with the tip of
his finger, and carefully dresses his hair, which is
scanty now, but curly and raven-black—an utter]
delicate Sardanapalus, a Cinyras, a very Agathon (that
charming writer of tragedies, don’t you know?). I
am thus explicit that you may recognize him by
these tokens, and may not overlook a creature so
marvellous, and so dear to Aphrodite and the Graces.
But what am I talking about? Even if you had
your eyes shut, and he should come and speak to
you, unsealing those Hymettus lips and releasing
upon the air those wonted intonations, you would




 

discover that he is not like us “who eat the fruit of
the glebe,” but some unfamiliar spirit, nurtured
on dew or on ambrosia. 

 
If, then, you go to him and put yourself in his
hands, you will at once, without effort, become an
orator, the observed of all, and, as he himself calls it,
king of the platform, driving the horses of eloquence
four-in-hand. For on taking you in charge, he will
teach you first of all—but let him address you
himself.

It would be comical for me to do the
talking on behalf of such an accomplished speaker,
as I should be poorly cast, it may very well be,
for parts of that nature and importance; I might
fall down and so put out of countenance the hero
whom I impersonated. 

 
He would address you, then, somewhat in this
fashion, tossing back what hair is still left him,
faintly smiling in that sweet and tender way which
is his wont, and rivalling Thais herself of comic
fame, or Malthace, or Glycera, in the seductiveness
of his tone, since masculinity is boorish and not in
keeping with a delicate and charming platform-hero
—

he will address you, I say, using very moderate
language about himself: “Prithee, dear fellow, did
Pythian Apollo send you to me, entitling me
the best of speakers, just as, when Chaerephon
questioned him, he told who was the wisest in that
generation? If that is not the case, but you have
come of your own accord in the wake of rumour,
because you hear everybody speak of my achievements with astonishment, praise, admiration, and
self-abasement, you shall very soon learn what a
superhuman person you have come to. Do not expect to see something that you can compare with



 

So-and-so, or So-and-so; no, you will consider the
achievement far too prodigious and amazing even
for Tityus or Otus or Ephialtes. Indeed, as far as
the others are concerned, you will find that I drown
them out as effectively as trumpets drown flutes, or
cicadas bees, or choirs their leaders.

“As you yourself wish to become a speaker, and
cannot learn this with greater ease from anyone else,
just attend, dear lad, to all that I shall say, copy me in
everything, and always keep, I beg you, the rules
which I shall bid you to follow. ‘In fact, you may
press on at once; you need not feel any hesitation
or dismay because you have not gone through all the
rites of initiation preliminary to Rhetoric, through
which the usual course of elementary instruction
guides the steps of the senseless and silly at the
cost of great weariness. You will not require them
at all. No, go straight in, as the proverb says, with
unwashen feet, and you will not fare any the worse
for that, even if you are quite in the prevailing
fashion and do not know how to write. Orators
are beyond all that!

“I shall first tell you what equipment you must
yourself bring with you from home for the journey,
and how you must provision yourself so that you can
finish it soonest. Then giving you my personal
instruction along the road, partly by example set
for you while you proceed, and partly by precept,
before sunset I shall make you a public speaker,
superior to them all, just like myself—indubitably



 

first, midmost and last of all who undertake to make
speeches. 

 
“Bring with you, then, as the principal thing, ignorance; secondly, recklessness, and thereto effrontery
and shamelessness. Modesty, respectability, selfrestraint, and blushes may be left at home, for they
are useless and somewhat of a hindrance to the
matter in hand. But you need also a very loud
voice, a shameless singing delivery, and a gait like
mine. They are essential indeed, and sometimes
sufficient in themselves. Let your clothing be
gaily-coloured, or else white, a fabric of Tarentine
manufacture, so that your body will show through ;
and wear either high Attic sandals of the kind that
women wear, with many slits, or else Sicyonian
boots, trimmed with strips of white felt. Have also
many attendants, and always a book in hand.

“That is what you must contribute yourself.
The rest you may now see and hear by the way, as
you go forward. And next I shall tell you the rules
that you must follow in order that Rhetoric may
recognize and welcome you, and not turn you her
back and bid you go to, as if you were an
outsider prying into her privacies. First of all, you
must pay especial attention to outward appearance,
and to the graceful set of your cloak. Then cull
from some source or other fifteen, or anyhow not more
than twenty, Attic words, drill yourself carefully in
them, and have them ready at the tip of your tongue



 

—‘sundry,’ ‘eftsoons,’ ‘prithee,’ ‘in some wise,’ ‘fair
sir, and the like. Whenever you speak, sprinkle
in some of them as a relish. Never mind if the rest
is inconsistent with them, unrelated, and discordant.
Only let your purple stripe be handsome and bright,
even if your cloak is but a blanket of the thickest
sort.

Hunt up obscure, unfamiliar words, rarely
used by the ancients, and have a heap of these in
readiness to launch at your audience. The many-headed crowd will look up to you and think you
amazing, and far beyond themselves in education,
if you call rubbing down ‘ destrigillation,’ taking a
sun-bath ‘insolation,’ advance payments ‘hansel,’
and daybreak ‘crepuscule.” Sometimes you must
yourself make new monstrosities of words and prescribe that an able writer be called fine-dictioned,
an intelligent man sage-minded, and a dancer handiwise. . If you commit a solecism or a barbarism, let
shamelessness be your sole and only remedy, and be
ready at once with the name of someone who is not
now alive and never was, either a poet or a historian,
saying that he, a learned man, extremely precise
in his diction, approved the expression. As for
reading the classics, don’t you do it—either that
twaddling Isocrates or that uncouth Demosthenes or
that tiresome Plato. No, read the speeches of the
men who lived only a little before our own time, and




 

these pieces that they call ‘exercises,’ in order to
secure from them a supply of provisions which you
can use up as occasion arises, drawing, as it were, on
the buttery.

“When you really must speak, and those present
suggest themes and texts for your discussion, carp
at all the hard ones and make light of them as not
fit, any one of them, fora real man. But when they
have made their selection, unhesitatingly say ‘whatever comes to the tip of your unlucky tongue.’ 
Take no pains at all that the first thing, just because it really is first, shall be said at the appropriate
time, and the second directly after it, and the third
after that, but say first whatever occurs to you first ;
and if it so happens, don’t hesitate to buckle your
leggings on your head and your helmet on your leg.*
But do make haste and keep it going, and only don’t
stop talking. If you are speaking of a case of assault
or adultery at Athens, mention instances in India
or Ecbatana. Cap everything with references to
Marathon and Cynegeirus, without which you cannot
succeed at all. Unendingly let Athos be crossed in
ships and the Hellespont afoot; let the sun be
shadowed by the arrows of the Medes, and Xerxes
flee the field and Leonidas receive admiration; let
the inscription of Othryades be deciphered, and let
allusions to Salamis, Artemisium, and Plataea come
thick and fast. Over everything let those few
words of yours run riot and bloom, and let ‘sundry’




 

and ‘forsooth’ be incessant, even if there is no need
of them ; for they are ornamental even when uttered
at random.

“If ever it seems an opportune time to intone,
intone everything and turn it into song. And if
ever you are at a loss for matter to intone, say
‘Gentlemen of the jury’ in the proper tempo and
consider the music of your sentence complete. Cry
‘Woe is me!’ frequently; slap your thigh, bawl,
clear your throat while you are speaking, and stride
about swaying your hips. If they do not cry
‘Hear!’ be indignant and upbraid them; and if
they stand up, ready to go out in disgust, command
them to sit down: in short, carry the thing with a
high hand.

“That they may marvel at the fulness of your
speeches, begin with the story of Troy, or even with
the marriage of Deucalion and Pyrrha, if you like,
and bring your account gradually down to date.
Few will see through you, and they, as a rule, will
hold their tongues out of good nature; if, however,
they do make any comment, it will be thought that
they are doing it out of spite. The rank and file
are already struck dumb with admiration of your
appearance, your diction, your gait, your pacing
back and forth, your intoning, your sandals, and
that ‘sundry’ of yours; and when they see your
sweat and your labouring breath they cannot fail to
believe that you are a terrible opponent in debates.
Besides, your extemporary readiness goes a long
way with the crowd to absolve your mistakes and
procure you admiration ; so see to it that you never
write anything out or appear in public with a
prepared speech, for that is sure to show you up.

“Let your friends spring to their feet constantly
and pay you for their dinners by lending you a
hand whenever they perceive that you are about
to fall down, and giving you a chance to find what
to say next in the intervals afforded by their
applause. Of course you must make it your business to have a well-attuned chorus of your own. 
“There you have what concerns the speaking.
Afterwards let them dance attendance upon you
as you go away with your head swathed in your
mantle, reviewing what you have said. And if
any one accosts you, make marvellous assertions
about yourself, be extravagant in your self-praise,
and make yourself a nuisance to him. ‘What was
Demosthenes beside me?’ ‘Perhaps one of the
ancients is in the running with me!’ and that sort
of thing.

“I almost omitted the thing that is most important and most needful for maintaining your
reputation. Laugh at all the speakers. If anyone
makes a fine speech, let it appear that he is parading
something that belongs to someone else and is not
his own ; and if he is mildly criticized, let everything
that he says be objectionable. At public lectures,
go in after everybody else, for that makes you conspicuous; and when everybody is silent, let fall an
uncouth expression of praise which will draw the
attention of the company and so annoy them that
they will all be disgusted at the vulgarity of your





 

language and will stop their ears. Do not make
frequent gestures of assent, for that is common,
and do not rise, except once or at most twice. As
a rule, smile faintly, and make it evident that you
are not satisfied with what is being said. There
are plenty of opportunities for criticism if one has
captious ears. 

 
“For the rest, you need have no fear. Effrontery
and shamelessness, a prompt lie, with an oath to
confirm it always on the edge of your lips, jealousy
and hatred of everyone, abuse and plausible slanders
—all this will make you famous and distinguished in
an instant.

“So much for your life in public and in the open.
In your private life, be resolved to do anything and
everything—to dice, to drink deep, to live high and
to keep mistresses, or at all events to boast of it
even if you do not do it, telling everyone about it
and showing notes that purport to be written by
women. You must aim to be elegant, you know,
and take pains to create the impression that women
are devoted to you. This also will be set down
to the credit of your rhetoric by the public, who
will infer from it that your fame extends even to the
women’s quarters. And I say—do not be ashamed
to have the name of being an effeminate, even if you
are bearded or actually bald. There should be some
who hang about you on that account, but if there
are none, your slaves will answer. This helps your
rhetoric in many ways; it increases your shameless-



 

ness and effrontery. You observe that women are
more talkative, and that in calling names they are
extravagant and outstrip men. Well, if you imitate
them you will excel your rivals even there. Of
course you must use depilatories, preferably all
over, but if not, at least where most necessary.
And let your mouth be open for everything indifferently; let your tongue serve you not only
in your speeches, but in any other way it can.
And it can not only solecize and barbarize, not only
twaddle and forswear, call names and slander and
lie—it can perform other services even at night,
especially if your love affairs are too numerous.
Yes, that must know everything, be lively, and balk
at nothing.

“If you thoroughly learn all this, my lad—and
you can, for there is nothing difficult about it—I
promise you confidently that right soon you will
turn out an excellent speaker, just like myself.
And there is no need for me to tell you what will
follow—all the blessings that will instantly accrue
to you from Rhetoric. You see my own case. My
father was an insignificant fellow without even a
clear title to his freedom, who had been a slave
above Xois and Thmuis, and my mother was a
seamstress in the slums. For myself, as my personal
attractions were considered not wholly contemptible,
at first I lived with an ill-conditioned, stingy admirer
just for my keep. But then I detected the easi-


 

ness of this road, galloped over it, and reached the
summit; for I possessed (by thy grace, Fortune !)
all that equipment which I have already mentioned—
recklessness, ignorance, and shamelessness. And
now, in the first place, my name is no longer
Potheinus, but I have become a namesake of the
sons of Zeus and Leda. Moreover, I went to
live with an old woman and for a time got my
victuals from her by pretending to love a hag of
seventy with only four teeth still left, and those
four fastened in with gold! However, on account
of my poverty I managed to endure the ordeal, and
hunger made even those frigid, graveyard kisses
exceedingly sweet to me. Then I very nearly became heir to all her property, if only a plaguy slave
had not blabbed that I had bought poison for her.

I was bundled out neck and crop, yet even then I
was not at a loss for the necessaries of life. No,
I enjoy the name of a speaker, and prove myself
such in the courts, generally playing false to my
clients, although I promise the poor fools to deliver
their juries to them. To be sure I am generally unsuccessful, but the palm-leaves at my door are green
and twined with fillets, for I use them as bait for my
victims. But even to be detested by everyone, to
be notorious for the badness of my character and
the still greater badness of my speeches, to be
pointed out with the finger—‘ There he is, the man
who, they say, is foremost in all iniquity !’—seems to
me no slight achievement.





 
 

 
“This is the advice which I bestow upon you. By
Our Lady of the Stews, I bestowed it upon myself
long ago, and am deeply grateful to myself for it.”

Well, the gentleman will end his remarks with
that, and then it is up to you. If you heed what he
has said, you may consider that even now you are
where in the beginning you yearned to be; and
nothing can hinder you, as long as you follow his
rules, from holding the mastery in the courts, enjoying high favour with the public, being attractive,
and marrying, not an old woman out of a comedy,
as did your law-giver and tutor, but Rhetoric, fairest
of brides. Consequently, Plato’s famous phrase
about driving full-tilt in a winged car can be applied
by you to yourself with a better grace than by him
to Zeus! As for me, I am spiritless and fainthearted, so I will get out of the road for you, and stop
trifling with Rhetoric, being unable to recommend
myself to her by qualifications like those of yourself
and your friend. Indeed, I have stopped already ;
so get the herald to proclaim an uncontested victory
and take your tribute of admiration, remembering
only this, that it is not by your speed that you have
defeated us, through proving yourself more swift of
foot than we, but because you took the road that
was easy and downhill.