ZEUS 
Hermes, take this apple; go to Phrygia, to Priam’s
son, the herdsman—he is grazing his flock in the
foothills of Ida, on Gargaron—and say to him:
“Paris, as you are handsome yourself, and also well
schooled in all that concerns love, Zeus bids you be
judge for the goddesses, to decide which of them is
the most beautiful. As the prize for the contest, let
the victor take the apple.” (To the Gopprsses) You
yourselves must now go and appear before your judge.
I refuse to be umpire because I love you all alike and
if it were possible, should be glad to see you all
victorious. Moreover, it is sure that if I gave the
guerdon of beauty to one, I should inevitably get into
the bad graces of the majority. For those reasons I
4am not a proper judge for you, but the young
Phrygian to whom you are going is of royal blood
and near of kin to our Ganymede; besides, he is
ingenuous and unsophisticated, and one cannot consider him unworthy of a spectacle such as this.

APHRODITE 
For my part, Zeus, even if you should appoint
Momus himself to be our judge, I would go and face
the inspection confidently, for what could he carp at
inme? The others, too, ought to be satisfied with
the man.

 

 HERA 
We are not afraid either, Aphrodite, not even if
the arbitration is turned over to your own Ares. We
accept this Paris, whoever he may be.
 
 ZEUS 
Is that your view too, daughter ? What do you
say? You turn away and blush? Of course, it is the
way of a maid like you to be bashful in such matters,
but you nod assent anyhow. Go, then, and do not
get angry at your judge, those of you who are
defeated, and do not inflict any harm on the lad. It
is not possible for all of you to be equally beautiful.

HERMES 
Let us make straight for Phrygia; I will lead the
way, and you follow me without delaying. Be of
good courage; I know Paris. He is young and
handsome and in every way susceptible to love ; just
the sort to decide such questions. He would not
judge amiss, not he.
 
 APHRODITE 
What you say is all to the good and in my favour,
that our judge is just. Is he unmarried, or does
some woman live with him?
 
 HERMES 
Not quite unmarried, Aphrodite.
 
 APHRODITE 
What do you mean by that?
 
 HERMES 
Apparently someone is living with him, a woman
from Mount Ida, well enough, but countrified and
terribly unsophisticated ; however, he does not seem .
to think much of her. But why do you ask?


 

 APHRODITE 
It was just a casual question.

ATHENA 
I say, you are betraying your trust in talking to
her privately all this while.
 
 HERMES 
It was nothing alarming, Athena, or against you
and Hera; she asked me whether Paris is unmarried. ATHENA
Why was she inquisitive about that?
 
 HERMES 
I don’t know; she says, however, that she asked
because it came into her head casually, and not
because she had anything definite in view.
 
 ATHENA 
Well, what about it? Is he unmarried ?
 
 HERMES 
Apparently not.
 
 ATHENA 
Tell me, does he covet success in war and is he
fond of glory, or nothing but a herdsman ?.
 
 HERMES 
I can’t say for certain, but it is fair to suppose
that, being young, he yearns to acquire all that too,
and would like to be first in war.
 
 APHRODITE 
You see, I am not making any complaint or
reproaching you with talking confidentially to her ;
that is the way of fault-finders, not of Aphrodite !

 

 HERMES 
She herself asked me _ractically the same
questions ; so do not be ill-tempered or think you
are getting the worst of it if I answered her as I did
you, in a straightforward way.

But in the course of
our conversation we have already left the stars far
behind as we pressed on, and we are almost over
Phrygia. Indeed I can see Ida and the whole of
Gargaron plainly, and unless I am mistaken, even
Paris himself, your judge.
 
 HERA 
Where is he? I do not see him.
 
 HERMES 
Look in this direction, Hera, to the left; not near
the mountain-top, but on the side, where the cavern is, near which you see the herd.
 
 HERA 
But I do not see the herd.
 
 HERMES 
What? Don’t you see tiny cattle over here in the
direction of my finger, coming out from among the
rocks, and someone running down from the cliff,
holding a crook and trying to prevent the herd from
scattering out ahead of him?
 
 HERA 
I see now—if that is really he.
 
 HERMES 
Yes, itis he. As we are near now, let us alight
upon the earth and walk, if it is your pleasure, so
that we may not alarm him by flying suddenly down
from above.

 

 HERA 
You are right: let us do so... Now that we
have descended, it is in order, Aphrodite, for you to
go in front and lead the way for us. You are probably
acquainted with the countryside, since by common
report you often came down to visit Anchises.
 
 APHRODITE 
These jokes do not vex me greatly, Hera.

HERMES 
No matter: I will lead you, for I myself spent
some time on Ida when Zeus was in love with his
Phrygian lad, and I often came here when he sent
me down to watch the boy. Indeed, when he was
in the eagle, I flew beside him and helped him to lift
the pretty fellow, and if my memory serves me, it —
was from this rock just here that Zeus caught him
up. You see, he chanced to be piping to his flock
then, and Zeus, flying down behind him, grasped
him very delicately in his talons, held in his beak
the pointed cap which was on the boy’s head, and
bore him on high, terrified and staring at him with
his head turned backwards. So then I took the
syrinx, for he had let it fall in his fright—but here
is your umpire close by, so let us speak to him.

Good
day, herdsman.
 
 PARIS 
Good day to you also, young man. But who are
you, to have come here to see me, and who are these
women whom you have with you? They are not of a
sort to roam the mountains, being so beautiful.


 

 HERMES 
They are not women; it is Hera and Athena and
Aphrodite whom you see, Paris, and I am Hermes,
sent by Zeus—but why do you tremble and turn
pale? Don't be afraid; it is nothing terrible. He
bids you be judge of thelr beauty, saying that as you
are handsome yourself and also well schooled in all
that concerns love, he turns over the decision to you.
You will find out the prize for the contest if you
read the writing on the apple.
 
 PARIS 
Come, let me see what it says; “The fairest
may have me.”—How could I, Lord Hermes, a mere
mortal and a countryman, be judge of an extraordinary spectacle, too sublime for a herdsman? To
decide such matters better befits dainty, city-bred
folk. As for me, I could perhaps pass judgement as
an expert between two she-goats, as to which is the
more beautiful, or between two heifers;

but these
goddesses are all equally beautiful and I do not know
~ how a man could withdraw his eyes from one and
transfer them to another. They are not inclined to
come away readily, but wherever one directs them
first, they take firm hold and commend what is before
them; and if they pass over to something else, they
see that this too is beautiful and linger upon it,
mastered by what is near. In short, their beauty
encompasses and completely enthralls me, and I am
distressed that I cannot see with my whole body
as Argus did. I think I should pass a becoming
judgement if I should give the apple to them all.—
Another thing: one of them is Zeus’ sister and wife,

 

and the other two are his daughters! How, then,
could the decision help being hazardous from that
point of view also?
 
 HERMES 
I do not know; but it is impossible to escape
carrying out what Zeus has commanded.

PARIS 
Do me this one favour, Hermes: persuade them
not to be angry with me, the two that are defeated,
but to think that only my sight is at fault.
 
 HERMES 
They say they will do so, and now it is high time
for you to get your judging done.
 
 PARIS 
I shall try; what else can one do? But first I
want to know whether it will satisfy the requirements
to look them over just as they are, or must I have
them undress for a thorough examination ?
 
 HERMES 
That is your affair, as you are the judge. Give
your orders as you will.
 
 PARIS 
As I will? I want to see them naked.
 
 HERMES 
Undress, goddesses. Make your inspection, Paris.
I have turned my back.

APHRODITE 
Very well, Paris. I shall undress first, so that you
may discover that I am not just “white-armed”

 

and vain of “ox-eyes,” but that I am equally and
uniformly beautiful all over. 
 ATHENA 
Do not let her undress, Paris, until she puts aside
her girdle, for she is an enchantress; otherwise
she may bewitch you with it. And indeed she ought
not to appear before you made up to that extent and
bedaubed with all those colours, as if she were a
courtesan in earnest: she ought to show her beauty
unadorned.
 
 PARIS 
They are right about the girdle, so lay it aside.
 
 APHRODITE 
Then why do not you take off your helmet, Athena,
and show your head bare, instead of tossing your
plumes at the judge and frightening him? Are you
afraid that you may be criticized for the green glare
of your eyes if it is seen without trappings that inspire
terror ? 
 ATHENA 
There is the helmet for.you: I have taken it off.
 
 APHRODITE 
There is the girdle for you.




 

 HERA 
Come, let us undress.

PARIS 
O Zeus, god of miracles! What a spectacle! What
beauty! What rapture! How fair the maiden is!
How royal and majestic and truly worthy of Zeus is
the matron’s splendour! How sweet and delicious
is the other’s gaze, and how seductively she smiled!
But I have more than enough of bliss already ; and if
you please, I should like to examine each of you
separately, for at present I am all at sea and do not
know what to look at; my eyes are ravished in every
direction.
 
 APHRODITE 
Let us do that.
 
 PARIS 
Then you two go away, and you, Hera, stay here.
 
 HERA 
Very well, and when you have examined me
thoroughly, you must further consider whether the
rewards of a vote in my favour are also beautiful in
your eyes. If you judge me to be beautiful, Paris,
you shall be lord of all Asia.
 
 PARIS 
My decisions are not to be influenced by rewards.

But go; I shall do whatever seems best. Come,
Athena.
 
 ATHENA 
I am at your side, and if you judge me beautiful,
Paris, you shall never leave the-field of battle

 

defeated, but always victorious, for I shall make you
a warrior and a conqueror.
 
 PARIS 
I have no use, Athena, for war and battle. As you
see, peace reigns at present over Phrygia and Lydia,
and my father’s realm is free from wars. But have
no fear ; you shall not be treated unfairly, even if my
judgement is not to be influenced by gifts. Dress
yourself now, and put on your helmet, for I have seen
enough. It is time for Aphrodite to appear.

APHRODITE 
Here I am close by; examine me thoroughly, part
by part, slighting none, but lingering upon each.
And if you will be so good, my handsome lad, let me
tell you this. I have long seen that you are young
and more handsome than perhaps anyone else whom
Phrygia nurtures. While I congratulate you upon
your beauty, I find’ fault with you because, instead
of abandoning these crags and cliffs and living in
town, you are letting your beauty go to waste in
the solitude. What joy can you get of the mountains? What good can your beauty do the kine?
Moreover, you ought to have married by this time—
not a country girl, however, a peasant, like the
women about Ida, but someone from Greece, either
from Argos or Corinth or a Spartan like Helen, who
is young and beautiful and not a bit inferior to me,
and above all, susceptible to love. If she but saw
you, I know very well that, abandoning everything
and surrendering without conditions, she would
follow you and make her home with you. No doubt
you yourself have heard something of her.


 

 PARIS 
Nothing, Aphrodite, but I should be glad to hear
you tell all about her now.

APHRODITE 
In the first place, she is the daughter of that
lovely Leda to whom Zeus flew down in the form of
a swan.
 
 PARIS 
What is her appearance ?
 
 APHRODITE 
She is white, as is natural in the daughter of a
swan, and delicate, since she was nurtured in an eggshell, much given to exercise and athletics, and so
very much sought for that a war actually broke out
over her because Theseus carried her off while she was
still a young girl. Moreover, when she came to
maturity, all the noblest of the Achaeans assembled
to woo her, and Menelaus, of the line of Pelops, was
given the preferenee. If you like, I will arrange the
marriage for you.
 
 PARIS 
What do you mean? With a married woman?
 
 APHRODITE 
You are young and countrified, but I know how
such things are to be managed.
 
 PARIS 
How? I too want to know.

APHRODITE 
You will go abroad on the pretext of seeing
Greece, and when you come to Sparta, Helen will
see you. From that time on it will be my look-out
that she falls in love with you and follows you.

 

 PARIS 
That is just the thing that seems downright
incredible to me, that she should be willing to
abandon her husband and sail away with a foreigner
and a stranger.
 
 APHRODITE 
Be easy on that score; I have two beautiful pages,
Desire and Love; these I shall give you to be your
guides on the journey. Love will enter wholly into
her heart and compel the woman to love you, while
Desire will encompass you and make you what he is
himself, desirable and charming. I myself shall be
there too, and I shall ask the Graces to go with me;
and in this way, by united effort, we shall prevail
upon her.
 
 PARIS 
How this affair will turn out is uncertain,
Aphrodite; but, anyhow, I am in love with Helen
already ; somehow or other I think I see her; I am
sailing direct to Greece, visiting Sparta, coming back
again with the woman—and it irks me not to be
doing all this now!

APHRODITE 
Do not fall in love, Paris, until you have requited
me, your match-maker and maid of honour, with the
decision. It would be only fitting that when I am
there with you, I too should be triumphant, and that
we should celebrate at the same time your marriage
and my victory. It is in your power to buy everything—her love, her beauty, and her hand—at the
price of this apple.
 
 PARIS 
I am afraid you may dismiss me from your mind
after the decision.

 

 APHRODITE 
Do you want me to take an oath?
 
 PARIS 
Not at all; but promise once again.
 
 APHRODITE 
I do promise that I will give you Helen to wife,
and that she shall follow you and come to your ©
people in Troy ; and I myself will be there and help
in arranging it all.
 
 PARIS 
And shall you bring Love and Desire and the
Graces ?
 
 APHRODITE 
Have no fear; I shall take with me Longing and
Wedlock as well.
 
 PARIS 
Then on these conditions I award you the apple:
take it on these conditions.