INTRODUCTION 
 
 	The modern bride will undoubtedly turn up her nose and shake her independent
					head in disapproval of Plutarch's suggestions about subordinating herself to
					her husband, and nobody will attempt to deny that the status of women has
					changed materially since Plutarch's time; but, apart from this, she will
					find in Plutarch's short essay many suggestions regarding whole-souled
					co-operation and cheerful intellectual companionship with her husband, which
					mutatis mutandis hold as good to-day as they did when they were written,
					nearly two thousand years ago. Nor is the husband neglected; he can find
					much sound advice regarding his attitude towards his wife and the respect
					and consideration that is always due to her. 
 Plutarch was no mere theorist in these matters. He himself was happily
					married, and anyone who doubts this should read his letter to his wife
					(Moralia, 608 a). 
 The essay is included in the catalogue of Lamprias (see Vol. I. Introd. p.
					xviii) and is not infrequently quoted or referred to by later writers,
					Stobaeus, for example, in his Florilegium, especially lxxiv., and Hieronymus
					(St. Jerome), Adversus Iovinianum, i. ad fin. It is well worth while, in
					this connexion, to read Jeremy Taylor's sermon, The Marriage Ring, to see
					how a famous preacher served up many of the ideas of a heathen philosopher
					to a Christian congregation.

From Plutarch to Pollianus and Eurydice, health and
						prosperity. 
				 
 Following close upon the time-honoured rites which the priestess of Demeter 
					applied to you when you were retiring together to the bridal chamber, a
					discourse which equally touches both of you and swells the nuptial song
					will, I think, have a useful effect which will also accord with convention. 
 In music they used to call one of the conventional themes for the flute the
					 Horse Rampant, 
 a strain which, as it seems, aroused an
					ardent desire in horses and imparted it to them at the time of mating. Of
					the many admirable themes contained in philosophy, that which deals with
					marriage deserves no less serious attention than any other, for by means of
					it philosophy weaves a spell over those who are entering together into a
					lifelong partnership, and renders them gentle and amiable toward each other.
					I have therefore drawn up a compendium of what you, who have been brought up
					in the atmosphere of philosophy, have often heard, putting it in the form of
					brief comparisons that it may be more easily remembered, and I am sending it
					as a gift for you both to possess in common; and at the same time I pray
					that the Muses may lend their presence and co-operation
					to Aphrodite, and may feel that it is no more fitting for them to provide a
					lyre or lute well attuned than it is to provide that the harmony which
					concerns marriage and the household shall be well attuned through reason,
					concord, and philosophy. Indeed, the ancients gave Hermes a place at the
					side of Aphrodite, in the conviction that the pleasure in marriage stands
					especially in need of reason; and they also assigned a place there to
					Persuasion and the Graces, so that married people should succeed in
					attaining their mutual desires by persuasion and not by fighting and
					quarrelling.

Solon directed that the bride should nibble a quince before getting into
					bed, intimating, presumably, that the delight from lips and speech should be
					harmonious and pleasant at the outset.

In Boeotia, after veiling the bride, they put on her head a chaplet of
					asparagus; for this plant yields the finest flavoured fruit from the
					roughest thorns, and so the bride will provide for him who does not run away
					or feel annoyed at her first display of peevishness and unpleasantness a
					docile and sweet life together. Those who do not patiently put up with the
					early girlish disagreements are on a par with those who on account of the
					sourness of green grapes abandon the ripe clusters to others. Again, many of
					the newly married women because of their first experiences get annoyed at
					their husbands, and find 
					 themselves in like predicament with those who patiently
					submit to the bees' stings, but abandon the honeycomb.

In the beginning, especially, married people ought to be on their guard
					against disagreements and clashes, for they see that such household vessels
					as are made of sections joined together are at the outset easily pulled
					apart by any fortuitous cause, but after a time, when their joints have
					become set, they can hardly be separated by fire and steel.

Just as fire catches readily in chaff, fibre, and hares' fur, but goes out
					rather quickly, unless it gets hold of some other thing that can retain it
					and feed it, so the keen love between newly married people that blazes up
					fiercely as the result of physical attractiveness must not be regarded as
					enduring or constant, unless, by being centred about character and by
					gaining a hold upon the rational faculties, it attains a state of vitality.

Fishing with poison is a quick way to catch fish and an easy method of taking
					them, but it makes the fish inedible and bad. In the same way women who
					artfully employ love-potions and magic spells upon their husbands, and gain
					the mastery over them through pleasure, find themselves consorts of
					dull-witted, degenerate fools. The men bewitched by Circe were of no service
					to her, nor did she make the least use of them after they had been changed
					into swine and asses, while for Odysseus, who had sense and showed
					discretion in her company, she had an exceeding great love.

Women who prefer to have power over fools rather than to hearken to sensible
					men, are like persons who prefer to guide the blind on the road rather than to follow persons possessed of knowledge
					and sight.

Women will not believe that Pasiphaë, the consort of a king, fell in
					love with a bull, in spite of the fact that they see some of their sex who
					feel bored by uncompromising and virtuous men, and take more pleasure in
					consorting with those who, like dogs and he-goats, are a combination of
					licentiousness and sensuality.

Men who through weakness or effeminacy are unable to vault upon their horses
					teach the horses to kneel of themselves and crouch down. In like manner,
					some who have won wives of noble birth or wealth, instead of making
					themselves better, try to humble their wives, with the idea that they shall
					have more authority over their wives if these are reduced to a state of
					humility. But, as one pays heed to the size of his horse in using the rein,
					so in using the rein on his wife he ought to pay heed to her position.

Whenever the moon is at a distance from the sun we see her conspicuous and
					brilliant, but she disappears and hides herself when she comes near him.
					Contrariwise a virtuous woman ought to be most visible in her husband's
					company, and to stay in the house and hide herself when he is away.

Herodotus was not right in saying that a woman lays aside her modesty along
					with her undergarment. On the contrary, a virtuous woman puts on modesty in
					its stead, and husband and wife bring into their mutual relations the
					greatest modesty as a token of the greatest love.

Whenever two notes are sounded in accord the tune is carried by the bass;
					and in like manner every activity in a virtuous household is carried on by both parties in agreement, but discloses the
					husband's leadership and preferences.

The Sun won a victory over the North Wind. For the wind tried by force to
					rob a man of his cloak, and blew briskly against him, but the man only drew
					his garment closer, and held it more tightly together. But when the heat of
					the sun succeeded the wind, the man began to get warm, and later very hot,
					and ended by stripping off his shirt as well as his cloak. This is the way
					most women act. When their husbands try forcibly to remove their luxury and
					extravagance they keep up a continual fight and are very cross; but if they
					are convinced with the help of reason, they peaceably put aside these things
					and practise moderation.

Cato expelled from the Senate a man who kissed his own wife in the presence
					of his daughter. This perhaps was a little severe. But if it is a disgrace
					(as it is) for man and wife to caress and kiss and embrace in the presence
					of others, is it not more of a disgrace to air their recriminations and
					disagreements before others, and, granting that his intimacies and pleasures
					with his wife should be carried on in secret, to indulge in admonition,
					faultfinding, and plain speaking in the open and without reserve?

Just as a mirror, although embellished with gold and precious stones, is good
					for nothing unless it shows a true likeness, so there is no advantage in a
					rich wife unless she makes her life true to her husband's and her character
					in accord with his. If the mirror gives back a gloomy image of a glad man,
					
					 or a cheerful and grinning image of a troubled and
					gloomy man, it is a failure and worthless. So too a wife is worthless and
					lacking in sense of fitness who puts on a gloomy face when her husband is
					bent on being sportive and gay, and again, when he is serious, is sportive
					and mirthful. The one smacks of disagreeableness, the other of indifference.
					Just as lines and surfaces, in mathematical parlance, have no motion of
					their own but only in conjunction with the bodies to which they belong, so
					the wife ought to have no feeling of her own, but she should join with her
					husband in seriousness and sportiveness and in soberness and laughter.

Men who do not like to see their wives eat in their company are thus teaching
					them to stuff themselves when alone. So those who are not cheerful in the
					company of their wives, nor join with them in sportiveness and laughter, are
					thus teaching them to seek their own pleasures apart from their husbands.

The lawful wives of the Persian kings sit beside them at dinner, and eat with
					them. But when the kings wish to be merry and get drunk, they send their
					wives away, and send for their music-girls and concubines. In so far they
					are right in what they do, because they do not concede any share in their
					licentiousness and debauchery to their wedded wives. If therefore a man in
					private life, who is incontinent and dissolute in regard to his pleasures,
					commit some peccadillo with a paramour or a maidservant, his wedded wife
					ought not to be indignant or angry, but she should reason that it is respect
					for her which leads him to share his debauchery, licentiousness, and
					wantonness with another woman.

Kings fond of the arts make many persons incline to be artists, those fond of
					letters make many want to be scholars, and those fond of sport make many
					take up athletics. In like manner a man fond of his personal appearance
					makes a wife all paint and powder; one fond of pleasure makes her
					meretricious and licentious, while a husband who loves what is good and
					honourable makes a wife discreet and well-behaved.

A young Spartan woman, in answer to an inquiry as to whether she had already
					made advances to her husband, said, No, but he has made them to
						me. 
 This behaviour, I take it, is characteristic of the true
					mistress of the household, on the one hand not to avoid or to feel annoyed
					at such actions on the part of her husband if he begins them, and on the
					other not to take the initiative herself; for the one course is meretricious
					and froward, the other disdainful and unamiable.

A wife ought not to make friends of her own, but to enjoy her husband's
					friends in common with him. The gods are the first and most important
					friends. Wherefore it is becoming for a wife to worship and to know only the
					gods that her husband believes in, and to shut the front door tight upon all
					queer rituals and outlandish superstitions. For with no god do stealthy and
					secret rites performed by a woman find any favour.

Plato asserts that the state is prosperous and happy in which the people
					hear mine and not mine most rarely uttered,
					the reason being that the citizens, so far as in them lies, treat all things
					of real importance as common property. Much more should such expressions be
					eliminated from the married state; save that, as
					physicians tell us that blows on the left side of the body record the
					sensation on the right side, so, in the same way, it is a lovely thing for
					the wife to sympathize with her husband's concerns and the husband with the
					wife's, so that, as ropes, by being intertwined, get strength from each
					other, thus, by the due contribution of goodwill in corresponding measure by
					each member, the copartnership may be preserved through the joint action of
					both. For Nature unites us through the commingling of our bodies, in order
					that, by taking and blending together a portion derived from each member of
					a pair, the offspring which she produces may be common to both, so that
					neither can define or distinguish his own or the other's part therein. Such
					a copartnership in property as well is especially befitting married people,
					who should pour all their resources into a common fund, and combine them,
					and each should not regard one part as his own and another part as the
					other's, but all as his own and nothing as the other's. As we call a mixture
					 wine, although the larger of the component parts is
					water, so the property and the estate ought to be said to belong to the
					husband even though the wife contribute the larger share.

Helen was fond of wealth and Paris of pleasure; Odysseus was sensible and
					Penelope virtuous. Therefore the marriage of the latter pair was happy and
					enviable, while that of the former created an Iliad of woes 
					for Greeks and barbarians.

The Roman, on being admonished by his friends because he had put away a
					virtuous, wealthy, 
					 and lovely wife, reached out his shoe and said,
					 Yes, this is beautiful to look at, and new, but nobody knows
						where it pinches me. A wife, then, ought not to rely on her
					dowry or birth or beauty, but on things in which she gains the greatest hold
					on her husband, namely conversation, character, and comradeship, which she
					must render not perverse or vexatious day by day, but accommodating,
					inoffensive, and agreeable. For, as physicians have more fear of fevers that
					originate from obscure causes and gradual accretion than of those which may
					be accounted for by manifest and weighty reasons, so it is the petty,
					continual, daily clashes between man and wife, unnoticed by the great
					majority, that disrupt and mar married life.

King Philip was enamoured of a Thessalian woman who was accused of using
					magic charms upon him. Olympias accordingly made haste to get the woman into
					her power. But when the latter had come into the queen's presence and was
					seen to be beautiful in appearance, and her conversation with the queen was
					not lacking in good-breeding or cleverness, Olympias exclaimed, Away
						with these slanders! You have your magic charms in yourself. 
 
					And so a wedded and lawful wife becomes an irresistible thing if she makes
					everything, dowry, birth, magic charms, and even the magic girdle itself,
					to be inherent in herself, and by character and virtue succeeds in winning
					her husband's love.

On another occasion, when a young man of the court had married a beautiful
					woman of bad reputa- 
					 tion, Olympias said, That fellow has no brains;
						else he would not have married on sight. Marriages ought not to
					be made by trusting the eyes only, or the fingers either, as is the case
					with some who take a wife after counting up how much she brings with her,
					but without deciding what kind of a helpmate she will be.

Socrates used to urge the ill-favoured among the mirror-gazing youth to make
					good their defect by virtue, and the handsome not to disgrace their face and
					figure by vice. So too it is an admirable thing for the mistress of the
					household, whenever she holds her mirror in her hands, to talk with
					herself—for the ill-favoured woman to say to herself, What
						if I am not virtuous? and the beautiful one, What if I
							am virtuous as well? For if the ill-favoured woman is loved
					for her character, that is something of which she can be very proud, far
					more than if she were loved for her beauty.

The Sicilian despot sent clothing and jewellery of the costly kind to the
					daughters of Lysander; but Lysander would not accept them, saying, 
						These adornments will disgrace my daughters far more than they will
						adorn them. But Sophocles, before Lysander, had said this:
					Adornment! No, you wretch! Naught that adorns 'Twould seem to
					be—your crazy mind's desire. For, as Crates used to say, 
						adornment is that which adorns, and that adorns or decorates a
					woman which makes her more decorous. It is not gold or precious stones or
					scarlet that makes her such, but 
					 whatever invests her with that something which betokens
					dignity, good behaviour, and modesty.

Those who offer sacrifice to Hera, the Protectress of Wedlock, do not
					consecrate the bitter gall with the other parts of the offering, but remove
					it and cast it beside the altar—an intimation on the part of him
					who established this custom that bitterness and anger ought never to find a
					place in married life. For the acerbity of the mistress, like that of wine,
					ought to be salutary and pleasant, not bitter like that of aloes, nor
					suggestive of a dose of medicine.

Plato advised Xenocrates, who was somewhat churlish in character but
					otherwise a good and honourable man, to sacrifice to the Graces. It is my
					opinion that the virtuous woman has especial need of graces in her relations
					with her husband, in order that, as Metrodorus used to put it, she
						may live pleasantly with him and not be cross all the time because she
						is virtuous. The thrifty woman must not neglect cleanliness, nor
					the loving wife cheerfulness; for asperity makes a wife's correct behaviour
					disagreeable, just as untidiness has a similar effect upon plain living.

The woman who is afraid to laugh and jest a bit with her husband, lest
					possibly she appear bold and wanton, is no different from one who will not
					use oil on her head lest she be thought to use perfume, or from one who will
					not even wash her face lest she be thought to use rouge. But we observe both
					poets and public speakers, such as try to avoid vulgarity, narrowness, and
					affectation in their diction, employing all artistry to move and stir the
					
					 hearer by means of their subject matter, their handling
					of it, and their portrayal of characters. So too the mistress of the
					household, just because she avoids and deprecates everything extravagant,
					meretricious, and ostentatious (and she does well to do so), ought all the
					more, in the graces of her character and daily life, to employ all artistry
					upon her husband, habituating him to what is honourable and at the same time
					pleasant. However, if a woman is naturally uncompromising, arbitrary, and
					unpleasant, the husband must be considerate, and do as Phocion did when
					Antipater prescribed for him a dishonourable and unbecoming course of
					action. Phocion said, You cannot use me as a friend and flatterer
						both, 
 and so the husband must reason about his virtuous and
					uncompromising wife, I cannot have the society of the same woman
						both as wife and as paramour.

The women of Egypt, by inherited custom, were not allowed to wear shoes, so
					that they should stay at home all day; and most women, if you take from
					them gold-embroidered shoes, bracelets, anklets, purple, and pearls, stay
					indoors.

Theano, in putting her cloak about her exposed her arm. Somebody exclaimed,
					 A lovely arm. 
					 But not for the public, said she. Not only the arm of the
					virtuous woman, but her speech as well, ought to be not for the public, and
					she ought to be modest and guarded about saying anything 
					 in the hearing of outsiders, since it is an exposure of
					herself; for in her talk can be seen her feelings, character, and
					disposition.

Pheidias made the Aphrodite of the Eleans with one foot on a tortoise, to
					typify for womankind keeping at home and keeping silence. For a woman ought
					to do her talking either to her husband or through her husband, and she
					should not feel aggrieved if, like the flute-player, she makes a more
					impressive sound through a tongue not her own.

Rich men and princes by conferring honours on philosophers adorn both
					themselves and the philosophers; but, on the other hand, philosophers by
					paying court to the rich do not enhance the repute of the rich but lower
					their own. So is it with women also; if they subordinate themselves to
					their husbands, they are commended, but if they want to have control, they
					cut a sorrier figure than the subjects of their control. And control ought
					to be exercised by the man over the woman, not as the owner has control of a
					piece of property, but, as the soul controls the body, by entering into her
					feelings and being knit to her through goodwill. As, therefore, it is
					possible to exercise care over the body without being a slave to its
					pleasures and desires, so it is possible to govern a wife, and at the same
					time to delight and gratify her.

Philosophers say of bodies that some are composed of separate elements, as a
					fleet or an army, others of elements joined together, as a house or a ship,
					and still others form together an intimate union, 
					 as is the case with every living creature. In about the
					same way, the marriage of a couple in love with each other is an intimate
					union; that of those who marry for dowry or children is of persons joined
					together: and that of those who merely sleep in the same bed is of separate
					persons who may be regarded as cohabiting, but not really living together. 
					As the mixing of liquids, according to what men of science say, extends
					throughout their entire content, so also in the case of married people there
					ought to be a mutual amalgamation of their bodies, property, friends, and
					relations. In fact, the purpose of the Roman law-giver who prohibited the
					giving and receiving of presents between man and wife was, not to prevent
					their sharing in anything, but that they should feel that they shared all
					things in common.

In Leptis, a city of Africa, it is an inherited custom for the bride, on
					the day after her marriage, to send to the mother of the bridegroom and ask
					for a pot. The latter does not give it, and also declares that she has none,
					her purpose being that the bride may from the outset realize the
					stepmother's attitude in her mother-in-law, and, in the event of some
					harsher incident later on, may not feel indignant or resentful. A wife ought
					to take cognizance of this hostility, and try to cure the cause of it, which
					is the mother's jealousy of the bride as the object of her son's affection.
					The one way to cure this trouble is to create an affection for herself
					personally on the part of her husband, and at the same time not to divert or
					lessen his affection for his mother.

Mothers appear to have a greater love for their sons because of a feeling
					that their sons are able to help them, and fathers for their daughters
					because of a feeling that the daughters have need of their help. Perhaps,
					also, because of the honour accorded by man and wife to each other, the one
					wishes openly to show that he feels greater esteem and affection for the
					attributes which are more characteristic of the other. And herein there may
					perhaps be a divergence, but, on the other hand, it is a nice thing if the
					wife, in the deference she shows, is observed to incline rather toward her
					husband's parents than her own, and, if she is distressed over anything, to
					refer it to them without the knowledge of her own parents. For seeming
					confidence begets confidence, and love, love.

The generals issued orders to the Greeks in Cyrus's army, that if the enemy
					advanced shouting they should receive them with silence, but, on the other
					hand, if the enemy kept silent, they should charge against them with a
					shout. Women who have sense keep quiet while their husbands in their fits of
					anger vociferate, but when their husbands are silent they talk to them and
					mollify them by words of comfort .

Euripides is right in censuring those who employ the lyre as an
					accompaniment to wine. For music ought rather to be invoked on occasions of
					anger and grief rather than to be made an added attraction for those who are
					engaged in their pleasures. So you two must regard those persons 
					 in error who for the sake of pleasure occupy the same
					bed, but when they get into some angry disagreement repose apart; they
					ought, instead, at that time especially to invoke Aphrodite, who is the best
					physician for such disorders. Such no doubt is the teaching of the poet 
					when he represents Hera as saying, I will settle their uncomposed quarrels,
						Sending them back to their bed to a union of loving enjoyment.

At all times and in all places a wife ought to try to avoid any clash with
					her husband, and a husband with his wife, but they ought to be especially on
					their guard against doing this in the privacy of their bedchamber. The woman
					in travail and pain kept saying to those who were trying to make her go to
					bed, How can the bed cure this ailment which I contracted in bed?
					 But the disagreements, recriminations, and angry passions which the
					bed generates are not easily settled in another place and at another time.

Hermione seems to speak the truth when she says, 
 Bad women's visits brought
					about my fall. This, however, does not come about so simply, but only when
					marital disagreements and jealousies open not only a wife's doors but also
					her hearing to such women. So, at such a time especially, a woman who has
					sense ought to stop her ears, and be on her guard against whispered
					insinuations, so that fire may not be added to fire, and she ought to have
					
					 ready in mind the saying of Philip. For it is told
					that when he was being incited by his friends against the Greeks on the
					ground that they were being well treated, but were speaking ill of him, he
					said, What would happen, then, if we were to treat them ill?
					 So when these back-biters say, Your husband treats
						grievously his loving and virtuous wife. 
					 Yes, what would happen, then, if I were to begin to hate him and
						wrong him?

A man whose slave had run away, on catching sight of the fugitive some time
					later, ran after him; but when the slave got ahead of him by taking refuge
					in a treadmill, the master said, Where else could I have wished to
						find you rather than here? 
 So then let the woman who, on
					account of jealousy, is entering a writ of divorce, and is in a high
					dudgeon, say to herself, Where else would my rival like better to
						see me, what would she rather have me do, than feel aggrieved with my
						husband and quarrel with him and abandon my very home and chamber?

The Athenians observe three sacred ploughings: the first at Scirum in
					commemoration of the most ancient of sowings; the second in Raria, and the
					third near the base of the Acropolis, the so-called Buzygius (the
					ox-yoking). But most sacred of all such sowings is the marital sowing and
					ploughing for the procreation of children. It is a beautiful epithet 
					 which Sophocles applied to Aphrodite when he called her
					 bountiful-bearing Cytherea. 
 Therefore man and wife
					ought especially to indulge in this with circumspection, keeping themselves
					pure from all unholy and unlawful intercourse with others, and not sowing
					seed from which they are unwilling to have any offspring, and from which if
					any issue does result, they are ashamed of it, and try to conceal it.

When the orator Gorgias read to the Greeks at Olympia a speech about
					concord, Melanthius said, This fellow is giving us advice about
						concord, and yet in his own household he has not prevailed upon himself,
						his wife, and maidservant, three persons only, to live in
						concord. For there was, apparently, some love on Gorgias's part
					and jealousy on the wife's part towards the girl. A man therefore ought to
					have his household well harmonized who is going to harmonize State, Forum,
					and friends. For it is much more likely that the sins of women rather than
					sins against women will go unnoticed by most people.

They say that the cat is excited to frenzy by the odour of perfumes. Now if
					it happened that women were similarly made furious and frantic by perfumes,
					it would be a dreadful thing for their husbands not to abstain from perfume,
					but for the sake of their own brief pleasure to permit their wives to suffer
					in this way. Now inasmuch as women are affected in this way, not by their
					husbands' using perfume, but by their having connexion with other women, it
					is unfair to pain and disturb them so much for the sake of a trivial
					pleasure, and not to follow with wives the practice observed in approaching
					bees 
					 (because these insects are thought to be irritable and
					bellicose towards men who have been with women) —to be pure and
					clean from all connexion with others when they approach their wives.

Those who have to go near elephants do not put on bright clothes, nor do
					those who go near bulls put on red ; for the animals are made especially
					furious by these colours; and tigers, they say, when surrounded by the
					noise of beaten drums go completely mad and tear themselves to pieces. 
					Since, then, this is also the case with men, that some cannot well endure
					the sight of scarlet and purple clothes, while others are annoyed by cymbals
					and drums, what terrible hardship is it for women to refrain from such
					things, and not disquiet or irritate their husbands, but live with them in
					constant gentleness?

A woman once said to Philip, who was trying to force her to come to him
					against her will, Let me go. All women are the same when the lights
						are out. This is well said as an answer to adulterous and
					licentious men, but the wedded wife ought especially when the light is out
					not to be the same as ordinary women, but, when her body is invisible, her
					virtue, her exclusive devotion to her husband, her constancy, and her
					affection, ought to be most in evidence.

Plato used to advise the elderly men more especially to have the sense of
					shame before the young, so that the young may be respectful toward them;
					for where the old men are without sense of shame, he felt, no respect or
					deference is engendered 
					 in the young. The husband ought to bear this in mind,
					and show no greater respect for anybody than for his wife, seeing that their
					chamber is bound to be for her a school of orderly behaviour or of
					wantonness. The man who enjoys the very pleasures from which he tries to
					dissuade his wife is in no wise different from him who bids her fight to the
					death against the enemies to whom he has himself surrendered.

In regard to love of finery, I beg, Eurydice, that you will read and try to
					remember what was written to Aristylla by Timoxena ; and as for you,
					Pollianus, you must not think that your wife will refrain from immoderate
					display and extravagance if she sees that you do not despise these things in
					others, but, on the contrary, find delight in gilded drinking-cups, pictured
					walls, trappings for mules, and showy neckbands for horses. For it is
					impossible to expel extravagance from the wife's part of the house when it
					has free range amid the men's rooms. 
 Besides, Pollianus, you already possess sufficient maturity to study
					philosophy, and I beg that you will beautify your character with the aid of
					discourses which are attended by logical demonstration and mature
					deliberation, seeking the company and instruction of teachers who will help
					you. And for your wife you must collect from every source what is useful, as
					do the bees, and carrying it within your own self impart it to her, and then
					discuss it with her, and make the best of these doctrines her favourite and
					familiar themes. For to her Thou art a father and precious-loved mother,
						Yea, and a brother as well. 
 
 No less ennobling is it
					for a man to hear his wife say, My dear husband, Nay, but thou art
						to me 
 guide, philosopher, and teacher in all that is most lovely and
						divine. Studies of this sort, in the first place, divert women
					from all untoward conduct; for a woman studying geometry will be ashamed to
					be a dancer, and she will not swallow any beliefs in magic charms while she
					is under the charm of Plato's or Xenophon's words. And if anybody professes
					power to pull down the moon from the sky, she will laugh at the ignorance
					and stupidity of women who believe these things, inasmuch as she herself is
					not unschooled in astronomy, and has read in the books about Aglaonice, the
					daughter of Hegetor of Thessaly, and how she, through being thoroughly
					acquainted with the periods of the full moon when it is subject to eclipse,
					and, knowing beforehand the time when the moon was due to be overtaken by
					the earth's shadow, imposed upon the women, and made them all believe that
					she was drawing down the moon. 
 It is said that no woman ever produced a child without the co-operation of a
					man, yet there are misshapen, fleshlike, uterine growths originating in some
					infection, which develop of themselves and acquire firmness and solidity,
					and are commonly called moles. 
 Great care must be taken
					that this sort of thing does not take place in women's minds. For if they do
					not receive the seed of good doctrines and share with their husbands in
					intellectual advance 
					 ment, they, left to themselves, conceive many untoward
					ideas and low designs and emotions. 
 And as for you, Eurydice, I beg that you will try to be conversant with the
					sayings of the wise and good, and always have at your tongue's end those
					sentiments which you used to cull in your girlhood's days when you were with
					us, so that you may give joy to your husband, and may be admired by other
					women, adorned, as you will be, without price, with rare and precious
					jewels. For you cannot acquire and put upon you this rich woman's pearls or
					that foreign woman's silks without buying them at a high price, but the
					ornaments of Theano, Cleobulina, Gorgo, the wife of Leonidas, Timocleia, 
					the sister of Theagenes, Claudia of old, Cornelia, daughter of Scipio, and
					of all other women who have been admired and renowned, you may wear about
					you without price, and, adorning yourself with these, you may live a life of
					distinction and happiness. 
 If Sappho thought that her beautiful compositions in verse justified her in
					writing , in the L.C.L. i. p. 69. to a certain rich woman, Dead in the tomb shalt thou lie, Nor shall
						there be thought of thee there, For in the roses of Pierian fields Thou hast
						no share, 
					 why shall it not be even more allowable for you to
					entertain high and splendid thoughts of yourself, if you have a share not
					only in the roses but also in the fruits which the Muses bring and
					graciously bestow upon those who admire education and philosophy?