Truly, it is well worth while to observe what most
people do and say at funerals, and on the other
hand what their would-be comforters say ; to observe
also how unbearable the mourners consider what is
happening, not only for themselves but for those
whom they mourn. Yet, I swear by Pluto and
Persephone, they have not one whit of definite
knowledge as to whether this experience is unpleasant and worth grieving about, or on the contrary delightful and better for those who undergo
it. No, they simply commit their grief into the
charge of custom and habit. When someone dies,
then, this is what they do—but stay! First I wish
to tell you what beliefs they hold about death itself,
for then it will become clear why they engage in
these superfluous practices.

The general herd, whom philosophers call the
laity, trust Homer and Hesiod and the other mythmakers in these matters, and take their poetry for a
law unto themselves. So they suppose that there is a
place deep under the earth called Hades, which is
large and roomy and murky and sunless; I don’t
know how they imagine it to be lighted up so that
everything in it can be seen. The king of the


 

abyss is a brother of Zeus named Pluto, who has
been honoured with that appellative, so I was told
by one well versed in such matters, because of
his wealth of corpses. This Pluto, they say, has
organized his state and the world below as follows.
He himself has been allotted the sovereignty of the
dead, whom he receives, takes in charge, and retains
in close custody, permitting nobody whatsoever to
go back up above, except, in all time, a very few
for most important reasons.

His country is surrounded by great rivers, fearful even in name; for
they are called “Wailing,” “Burning Fire,’ and the
like. But the principal feature is Lake Acheron,
which lies in front and first receives visitors; it
cannot be crossed or passed without the ferryman,
for it is too deep to ford afoot and too broad to
swim across—indeed, even dead birds cannot fly
across it!

Hard by the descent and the portal,
which is of adamant, stands the king’s nephew,
Aeacus, who is commander of the guard; and beside him is a three-headed dog, very long-fanged,
who gives a friendly, peaceable glance to those who
come in, but howls at those who try to run away
and frightens them with his great mouth.

After
passing the lake on going in, one comes next to a



 

great meadow overgrown with asphodel, and to a
spring that is inimical to memory; in fact, they
call it “Oblivion” for that reason. All this, by
the way, was told to the ancients by people who
came back from there, Alcestis and Protesilaus of
Thessaly, Theseus, son of Aegeus, and Homer's
Odysseus, highly respectable and trustworthy witnesses, who, I suppose, did not drink of the spring,
or else they would not have remembered it all.

Well, Pluto and Persephone, as these people said,
are the rulers and have the general over-lordship,
with a great throng of understrappers and assistants
in administration—Furies, Tormentors, Terrors, and
also Hermes, who, however, is not always with them.

As prefects, moreover, and satraps and judges, there
are two that hold court, Minos and Rhadamanthus
of Crete, who are sons of Zeus. These receive the
good, just men who have lived virtuously, and when
many have been collected, send them off, as if to a
colony, to the Elysian Fields to take part in the best
life.

But if they come upon any rascals, turning
them over to the Furies, they send them to the
Place of the Wicked, to be punished in proportion
to their wickedness. There—ah! what punishment
do they not undergo? They are racked, burned,
devoured by vultures, turned upon a wheel; they
roll stones uphill; and as for Tantalus, he stands
on the very brink of the lake with a parched throat,
like to die, poor fellow, for thirst!

But those of
the middle way in life, and they are many, wander
about in the meadow without their bodies, in the
form of shadows that vanish like smoke in your


 

fingers. They get their nourishment, naturally,
from the libations that are poured in our world and
the burnt-offerings at the tomb; so that if anyone
has not left a friend or kinsman behind him on
earth, he goes about his business there as an unfed
corpse, in a state of famine.

So thoroughly are people taken in by all this that
when one of the family dies, immediately they bring
an obol and put it into his mouth, to pay the ferryman
for setting him over. They do not stop to consider
what sort of coinage is customary and current in the
lower world, and whether it is the Athenian or the
Macedonian or the Aeginetan obol that is legal
tender there; nor, indeed, that it would be far
better not to be able to pay the fare, since in that
case the ferryman would not take them and they
would be escorted back to life again.

Then they bathe them (as if the lake down below
were not big enough for the people there to bathe
in); and after anointing with the finest of perfume
that body which is already hasting to corruption,
and crowning ‘it with pretty flowers, they lay them
in state, clothed in splendid raiment, which, very
likely, is intended to keep them from being cold
on the way and from being seen undressed by
Cerberus.

Next come cries of distress, wailing of women,
tears on all sides, beaten breasts, torn hair, and
bloody cheeks. Perhaps, too, clothing is rent and
dust sprinkled on the head, and the living are in a
plight more pitiable than the dead ; for they roll on
the ground repeatedly and dash their heads against
the floor, while he, all serene and handsome and

 

elaborately decked with wreaths, lies in lofty, exalted
state, bedizened as for a pageant.

Then his mother, or indeed his father comes
forward from among the family and throws himself
upon him; for let us imagine a handsome young
man upon the bier, so that the show that is acted
over him may be the more moving. The father
utters strange, foolish outcries to which the dead
man himself would make answer if he could speak.
In a plaintive tone, protracting every word, he will
say: “Dearest child, you are gone from me, dead,
reft away before your time, leaving me behind all
alone, woe is me, before marrying, before having
children, before serving in the army, before working
on the farm, before coming to old age; never again
will you roam the streets at night, or fall in love,
my child, or drink deep at wine-parties with your
young friends.”

He will say all that, and more in the same tenor,
thinking that his son still needs and wants this sort
of thing even after death, but cannot get it. But
that is nothing. Have not many sacrificed horses,
concubines, sometimes even cup-bearers, over their
dead, and burned or buried with them clothing and
other articles of personal adornment, as if they would
use them there and get some good of them down
below?

But as to the old man who mourns after this
fashion, it is not, in all probability, on account of
his son that he does all this melodramatic ranting
that I have mentioned, and more than I have mentioned ; for he knows that his son will not hear him
even if he shouts louder than Stentor. Nor yet is it
on his own account ; for it would have been enough

 

to think this and have it in mind, without his
shouting—nobody needs to shout at himself. Consequently it is on account of the others present that
he talks this nonsense, when he does not know what
has happened to his son nor where he has gone; in
fact he has not even considered what life itself is,
or else he would not take on so about the leaving of
it, as if that were something dreadful.

If his son should receive permission from Aeacus
and Aidoneus to put his head out of the mouth of the
pit for a moment and stop his father’s silliness, he
would say: “Unfortunate man, why do you shriek ?
Why do you trouble me? Stop tearing your hair
and marring the skin of your face!- Why do you
call me names and speak of me as wretched and
ill-starred when I have become far better off and
happier than you? What dreadful misfortune do
you think I am undergoing? Is it that I did not
get to be an old man like you, with your head bald,
your face wrinkled, your back bent, and your knees
trembling,—like you, who in short are rotten with
age after filling out so many months and so many
Olympiads, and who now, at the last, go out of
your mind in the presence of so many witnesses?
Foolish man, what advantage do you think there is
in life that we shall never again partake of? You
will say drinking, no doubt, and dinners, and dress,
and love, and you are afraid that for the want of all
this I shall die! But are you unaware that not to
thirst is far better than drinking, not to hunger
than eating, and not to be cold than to have
quantities of clothing?

“Come now, since you apparently do not know
how to mourn, I will teach you to do it more truth-

 

fully. Begin afresh, and ery, ‘Poor child, never
again will you be thirsty, never again hungry or
cold! You are gone from me, poor boy, escaping
diseases, no longer fearing fever or foeman or tyrant.
Love shall not vex you nor its pleasures rack you,
nor shal] you squander your strength in them twice
and thrice a day, woe is me! You shall not be
scorned in your old age, nor shall the sight of you
offend the young!’

If you say this, father, don't
you think it will be far more true and more manly
than what you said before ?
“But perhaps it is something else that worries
you. You are thinking of the gloom where we are,
and the profound darkness, and so you fear that I
may be stifled in the close custody of the tomb.
On that point you should reflect that as my eyes
will very soon be corrupted or even burned, if you
have decided to burn me, I shall have no need
either for darkness or for light as far as seeing is
concerned.

“That fear, however, is perhaps reasonable
enough; but what good do you think I get from
your wailing, and this beating of breasts to the music
of the flute, and the extravagant conduct of the
women in lamenting? Or from the wreathed
stone above my grave? Or what, pray, is the use
of your pouring out the pure wine? You don't
think, do you, that it will drip down to where we
are and get all the way through to Hades? As to
the burnt offerings, you yourselves see, I think,
that the most nourishing part of your provender is
carried off up to Heaven by the smoke without
doing us in the lower world the least bit of good,
and that what is left, the ashes, is useless, unless


 

you believe that we eat dust. Pluto’s realm is not
so devoid of seed and grain, nor is there any dearth
of asphodel among us, so that we must import our
food from you. So, by Tisiphone, the inclination
seized me long ago to burst out in a tremendous
guffaw over what you were doing and saying; but
I was prevented by the winding-sheet and by the
fillets with which you have bound up my jaws.”

These words spoken, at once the doom of death
overwhelmed him. 

By Heaven, if the dead man should face them,
raising himself upon his elbow, and say all this,
don’t you think he would be quite right? Nevertheless, the dolts not only shriek and scream, but
they send for a sort of professor of threnodies, who
has gathered a repertory of ancient bereavements,
and they use him as fellow-actor and prompter in
their silly performance, coming in with their groans
at the close of each strain that he strikes up!

Up to that point, the wailing, the same stupid
custom prevails everywhere; but in what follows,
the burial, they have apportioned out among themselves, nation by nation, the different modes. The
Greek burns, the Persian buries, the Indian encases
in glass, the Scythian eats, the Egyptian salts.
And the latter—I have seen whereof I speak—after
drying the dead man makes him his guest at table!
Many a time, too, when an Egyptian wants money,



 

his brother or his father helps him out of his straits
by becoming security at the critical juncture.

Regarding grave-mounds, pyramids, tombstones,
and epitaphs, all of which endure but a brief space,
are they not superfluous and akin to child’s play?

Some people, moreover, even hold competitions and
deliver funeral orations at the monuments, as if they
were pleading or testifying on behalf of the dead
man before the judges down below!

As the finishing touch to all this, there is the
funeral feast, and the relatives come in, consoling
the parents of the departed, and inducing them to
taste something. The parents themselves, I must
say, do not find it disagreeable to be constrained,
but are already done up with three days of continuous fasting. It is: “Man dear, how long are
we to lament? Let the spirits of the departed
rest! But if you have absolutely decided to keep
on weeping, for that very reason you must not
abstain from food, in order that you may prove
equal to the magnitude of your sorrow.” Then,
ah! then, two lines of Homer are recited by
everyone :

 
 
 Verily Niobe also, the fair-tressed, thought of her
dinner, 
 
 Iliad, 24, 602. 
 


and

 
 
 Mourning the dead by fasting is not to be done
by Achaeans, 
 
 Iliad, 19, 225. 
 






 

So they break bread, of course, but do it at first in
shame, and in fear that they will disclose themselves
to be still subject to human appetites after the death
of their dearest.
You will find, if you take note, that these things
and others still more ridiculous are done at funerals,
for the reason that people think death the greatest
of misfortunes.