IT is apparent that clothes make a man warm, not by
				warming him themselves or by imparting heat to him (for
				every garment is of itself cold, which is the reason that we
				see those that are very hot and in a fever often shifting and
				changing one thing for another), but what heat a man exhales out of himself, that the garment lying close to his
				body keeps together and contracts, and when it hath driven
				it inward, it will not suffer it again to dissipate. This
				being the very case of external affairs too, it is this that
				cheats vulgar heads, by making them think that, if they
				might but enclose themselves in great houses and heap
				together abundance of slaves and riches, they might then
				live to their own minds. But an agreeable and gay life is
				not to be found without us; on the contrary, it is man that
				out of his own temper, as out of a spring, adds pleasure
				and gayety to the things about him:
				 The house looks merrier when the fire burns. 
 
 And wealth is the more agreeable, and fame and power the
					more resplendent, when they have the joy of the mind to
					accompany them; since we see how that through a mild
					and tame disposition men can bear poverty, banishment,
					and old age easily and sweetly.

For as odors perfume threadbare coats and poor rags,
				while Prince Anchises's ulcer sent forth a loathsome purulence,
				 When the foul tent dript on his purple robe, 
 
 
 even so every state and condition of life, if accompanied
					with virtue, is undisturbed and delightful. But when vice
					is intermixed, it renders even the things that appear splendid, sumptuous, and magnificent most distasteful, nauseous,
					and unacceptable to the possessors.
					 
 
 This man's thought happy in the market-place,
					 
 But when he ope's his doors, hell is his case;
					 
 The woman governs all, commands and brawls. 
 
 
 
 Though one may without any great difficulty get rid of a
					wicked cross-grained wife, if he be but a man and not a
					slave. But a man cannot write a bill of divorce to his
					vice, and thereby free himself from further trouble, and
					procure his own repose by living apart; but it still cohabits
					with him, and dwells in his very bowels, and cleaves to him
					both by night and by day;
					 It burns without a torch, and hastens crude old age, 
 
 
 being through its vain glory a burthensome fellow-traveller,
					and through its voracity a chargeable table-companion, and
					a troublesome bed-fellow by breaking and spoiling one's
					sleep at night with cares, anxieties, and surmises. For
					when he does sleep his body is indeed at rest and quiet,
					but his mind is through superstition in terrors, dreams,
					and frights.
					 
 
 When in my slumbers sorrows fill me,
					 
 Then frightful dreams and visions kill me, 
 
 
 
 saith one; just thus envy, fear, anger, and lust affect us.
					For by day-time our vice, by looking abroad and fashioning
					herself to the manner of others, grows shamefaced, and
					finds herself obliged to mask her own disorders, and does
					not yield herself up wholly to her appetites, but oftentimes
					resists and struggles with them. But in times of sleep,
					when it escapes both the opinions of men and the laws,
					and is at the remotest distance from awe and respect, it
					stirs every desire, and raises up its malignity and lewdness.
					
					 
					
					For it attempts (as Plato speaks) the embraces of a mother,
					it purveys unlawful meats, and refrains from no sort of
					action, enjoying villany, as far as it is practicable, in shades
					and phantoms, that end in no real pleasure or accomplishment of desire, but have only power to stir up and enrage
					disorders and distempers.

Where then is the pleasure of vice, if there be nowhere to be found either freedom from care or exemption
				from trouble, or satisfaction or undisturbedness or repose?
				A sound complexion and good health of body give indeed
				both place and birth to the flesh's pleasures; but there
				cannot be engendered a gayety and cheerfulness in the
				mind, unless undauntedness, assurance, or an immovable
				serenity be the foundation. Nay, if some hope or satisfaction should simper a little, this would be soon puddled and
				disturbed by some sudden eruption of care, like a smooth
				sea by a rock.

Heap up gold, gather together silver, raise up walks,
				fill your house with slaves and the town with debtors; if
				you do not appease the disorders of your own mind, and
				stint your unsatiable desire, and deliver yourself from fears
				and cares, you do but rack wine for a man in a fever, and
				administer honey to a man disturbed with bile, and prepare meat and good cheer for people that have the flux or
				gripes, who can neither retain it nor be strengthened by it,
				but are over and above spoiled by it. Do you not see how
				sick persons loathe, spit out, and refuse the finest and most
				costly meats, though they be proffered and forced upon
				them; and how again, when their complexion alters, and
				good spirits, sweet blood, and a connatural heat are engendered, they get up and gladly and willingly eat brown bread,
				cheese, and cresses? Such a disposition as this is it that
				reason works in the mind. And you will have sufficiency,
				if you will but learn what a notable and generous mind is.
				You will live luxuriously in poverty, and be a prince; and
				
				 
				
				you will be as much in love with a vacant and private life
				as with that of a general or king. If you once apply to
				philosophy, you will never live without pleasure, but you
				will learn to be everywhere pleased, and with every thing.
				You will be pleased with wealth for making you beneficial
				to many, and with poverty for not having much to care for;
				with fame for being honored, and with obscurity for being
				unenvied.