This treatise concerneth heaven and the stars, yet
not the stars themselves nor heaven itself, but the
auspiciall verity that from them assuredly entereth
into the life of man. My discourse containeth not
counsell, nor proffereth instruction how to ply this
auspiciall art, but my aim is to chide those learned
men who cultivate and expose unto their disciples all
other studies, but neither esteem nor cultivate
astrology.

Although the science is ancient, not come
to us newly, but the creation of divinely favoured
kings of antiquity, yet men of these daies, through
ignorance, supinity, and mislike of labour, hold
opinions repugnant unto theirs, and when they
encounter men that make false prognostickes, they
impeach the stars and contemne astrology itself,
which they consider neither sound nor veridicall but a
vain and idle fiction; wherein, as I think, the
judge unjustly. For a wright’s unskillfullness
argueth not the wright’s art in error, nor a piper’s
untunefullness the art of musick devoid of sense.
Rather are they ignorant of their arts, and each of
these in itself rationall.

It was the Aethiopians that first delivered this
doctrine unto men. The ground thereof was in part
the wisdom of that nation, the Aethiopians being in
all else wiser than all men; but in part also the
benignity of their clime, since clear skyes and calm
weather ever invest them, and they are not subjected
to the vicissitudes of the yeere, but live in onely one
season. Therefore when they discerned, first of all,
that the moon hath not perpetually the same appearance, but carrieth a various aspect and changeth into
divers figures, they accounted the thing good reason
for wonder and empuzzlement. In consequence they
sought and found the cause thereof, that the lustre
of the moon is not her own but cometh to her from the
sun.

And they determined also the course of the
other stars, which we call planets or wanderers
because they alone of all the stars do move; also
their nature and potency, and the works that are
brought to pass by each of them. Also, they
ascribed names unto them, that yet were not
names, as they seemed, but symboles.

All which the Aethiopians observed in the skye,
and afterwards they transmitted their doctrine
incompleat to the Aegyptians. And the Aegyptians,
deriving from them the auspiciall art but half consummated, advanced it; and they indicated the
measure of each planet’s motion, and determined
the numericall extension of yeares and moneths and
hours. The moneths they measured by the moon



 

and her cycle, the year by the sun and his revolution.

And they devised other inventions much greater than
these. For they divided the entire skye and the
other stars that are inerrant and fixed, and do never
move, into twelve segments for such as move: which
they styled “houses,” although they resemble living
creatures, each patterned after the figure of a
different kind, whereof some are sea-monsters, some
humans, some wild beasts, some volatiles, some
juments.

For this reason, indeed, the Aegyptian deities are
portrayed in various aspects. For it is not to be
supposed that all Aegyptians were wont to draw
prognosticks from all the twelve signs; but some
had one sign in use, others another. The ram is
reverenced by those who looked up unto Aries, fish
is not eaten by those who attached signality unto
Pisces, the goat is not slain by those who had knowledge of Capricorn, and the other creatures are
severally venerated by other folk. Assuredly the
bull too is adored in honour of the celestial Taurus,
and Apis, esteemed by them an object of the uttermost sanctity, depastureth their land, and they that
inhabit it vouchsafe him an oracle in token of the
auspiciality of Taurus.

Not long after, the Libyans also espoused the
science; for the Libyan oracle of Ammon was founded
in regard of the heavens and his knowledge thereof;


 

whence they represent Ammon with a ram’s head.

And the Babylonians came to know all these things,
even before the others, as they themselves say; but
I think that the science reached them long afterward.

As for the Greeks, they learned not a whit of
astrology either from the Aethiopians or from the
Aegyptians. It was Orpheus, the son of Oeagrus and
Calliope, that first declared these matters unto them,
but not at all plainly, nor did he bring the science
forth unto illucidation but unto ingannation and pious
fraude, such being the humour of the man. _ For he
made a harp and exposed his mystick rites in poesy
and his theology in song; and the harp, that had
seven chords, discoursed the harmony of the errant
spheres. It was by investigating and ventilating
these matters that he enchanted and enthralled all
creatures; for he regarded not that harp of his nor
yet concerned himselfe with other musick, but this
was the mightie harp of Orpheus, and to honour
these things, the Greeks set apart a station in the
heavens and numerous stars are denominated
Orpheus his harp. 

 
If ever you see Orpheus pictured in mosaick stones
or in pigment, he sitteth in the centre, in the simili-





 

tude of one that sings, holding in his hands the harp,
and about him stand numberless creatures, among
which a bull, a man, a lion, and others after their
kind. When you see these, bethink you, pray, what
his song was, what his harp, and what the bull or
the lion that giveth ear to him. And if you would
know the originalls that I speak of, you may behold
each of them in the heavens.

They say, moreover, that Tiresias, a Boeotian
man, whose fame as touching prophecie is greatly
cried up, declared, unto the Greeks that of the errant
stars some are masle, some female, and that they
do not engender like effects; wherefore they fable
that Tiresias himself was bisexous and amphibious,
now masle, now female.

When Atreus and Thyestes contended for the
throne of their fathers, even then, it is plain, the
Greeks set great store by astrologie and celestial
lore; and the commonwealth of Argos determined
that which ever of them was more excellent than the
other in this lore should bear rule. Thereupon
Thyestes indicated and made manifest unto them the
Ram in the heavens, in consequence whereof they
fable that Thyestes had a golden lamb. But Atreus
declared the doctrine of the sun and its risings, that
the sun and the First Movable do not course in the
same direction, but rowle contrariwise to one another




 

and that which now seemeth his setting, being a
setting of the First Movable, is a rising of the sun.
At his saying this, the men of Argos made him their
king, and great renown for learning became his.

Concerning Bellerophon also I am of this opinion:
that he had a volatile as horse I do not at all believe,
but conceive that he pursued this wisdom and raised
his thoughts on high and held conversation with the
stars, and thus ascended unto heaven by means
not of his horse but of his wit.

The same may be said of Phrixus, the son of
Athamas, that is fabled to have ridden through the
ayr upon a golden ram. And certainly of Daedalus
the Athenian; although his story be strange, yet
methinks it is not without relation unto astrology, but
rather he practised it constantly himself and taught
it unto his son.

But because Icarus was governed
by youth and audacity, and sought not the attainable
but let his minde carry him into the zenith, he came
short of truth and defected from reason and was
precipitated into a sea of unfathomable perplexities.
But the Greeks tell an idle myth of him and loosely
call a golfe of their sea Icarian after his name.

Doubtless Pasiphae also, hearing from Daedalus
of the Bull that appeareth amongst the constellations
and of Astrology itself, fell in love with the doctrine ;



 

whence they derive the belief that Daedalus conjoined her in wedlock with the bull.

Again, there be-those who, dissecting the science
into parts, have made different discoveries, some
collecting the particulars of the moon, some those of
Jupiter, and some those of the sun, concerning their
course and motion and potency.

So Endymion
established the motions of the moon,

so Phaeton
inferred the course of the sun; yet not strictly, but
left the theory incompleat at his death. Ignorant
of this, men believe that Phaeton was Helius his son,
and they relate a story of him that is not at all
credible. Going, say they, unto Helius, his father,
he asked to drive the car of light; whiche he suffered
him to do, and also instructed him in the manner
of its governance. But when Phaeton mounted the
car, because of youth and inexpertness he drove
now close to earth, now at a vast remove; and men
were being destroyed both by cold and by heat that
passed endurance. Thereupon, Jupiter in wrath smote
Phaeton with a great bolt of lightning. After his
fall his sisters surrounding him made great dole until
they transmuted themselves, and now they are trees
of black poplar and distil amber over him in place of
tears. These things were not so, and it consisteth
not with piety to believe in them; Helius begat no
son, and no son of his perished.

But the Greeks relate many other fabulosities—
which I do not credit at all. For how doth it consist
with piety to believe that Aeneas was the’son of
Venus, Minos of Jupiter, Ascalaphus of Mars, or
Autolycus of Mercury? Nay, these were each and
all divinely favoured, and at their birth one of them
was under the regard of Venus, another of Jupiter,
another of Mars. For what powers soever are in
their proper houses at the moment of birth into this
life, those powers like unto parents make men
answerable to them in all respects, in complexion,
in figure, in workes, and in humour. So Minos
became a king because Jupiter was in his ascendancy,
Aeneas fair by the will of Venus, and Autolycus a
theef, whose theevery came to him from Mercury.

Moreover, it is not true, neither, that Jupiter put
Saturn in chaines or threw him into Tartarus or otherwise mistreated him as men credit. Nay, Saturn
moveth in the extream orbe, far away from us, and
his motion is sluggish and not easy to be apprehended
ocularly by human kind, whence they say that he
holdeth still as if fettered ; and the vast abyss of the
ayr is called Tartarus.

’Tis chiefly from the verses of Homer the poet and
of Hesiod that we may learn that antiquity holdeth
with the astrologers. When he describeth the chain
of Jupiter and the kine of the Sun, which I con-



 

ceive to be daies, and the cities that Vulcan made
upon the shield, and the choir, and the vineyard ...
All that he hath said of Venus and of Mars his
passion, is also manifestly composed from no other
source than this science. Indeed, it is the conjunction of Venus and Mars that createth the poetry of
Homer. And in other verses he distinguished the
duties of each, saying unto Venus,


 
 Nay, be it thine to control the delightsome duties
of wedlock, 
 


and anent those of warfare,

 
 
 These shall all be the care of impetuous Mars and
Minerva. 
 
 Iliad, V, 429, 430.

Discerning all these things, the ancients had divination in very great use and counted it no parergy, but
would found no cities, invest themselves with no
ramparts, slay no men, wed no women, untill they
had been advised in all particulars by diviners. And
certainly their oracles were not aloof from astrology,
but at Delphi a virgin hath the office of prophet
in token of the celestial Virgin, and a serpent
giveth voice beneath the tripod because a Serpent
giveth light among the stars, and at Didymi also
the oracle of Apollo hath its name, methinks, from
the heavenly Twins.

So firmly did they believe divination a thing most
sacred, that when Ulysses, wearied of wandering,
took a phansie to learn the truth as touching his
affaires, he went off unto Hell, not “to behold dead
men and a land that is joyless,” but because he would
come to speech with Tiresias. And when he was
come to the place whereunto Circe directed him, and
had dug his pit and slain his sheep, although many dead
that were by, and amongst them his own mother,
were fain to drink of the blood, he suffered none of
them, not even his very mother, until he had wet the
throstle of Tiresias and constrained him to deliver
the prophecy, verily enduring to behold his mother’s
shadow athirst.

For the Spartans, Lycurgus drew from the skye his
ordering of their whole polity and made it their law
never to leave their country, even to go to the wars,
before the moon should be at her full, for he conceited
that the potency of the moon is not the same when
she waxeth and when she waneth, and that all things
are subject unto her sway.

The Arcadians, however,
and none but they, would have naught of this and
yeelded no honour unto astrologie ; and in their folly
they affirm that they are older than the moon.

Whereas our forbears were so mightily enamoured
of divination, among this generation there be some
who say that it is an impossibility for mankind to
conceive a useful purpose of astrologie. It is neither
credible, say they, nor truthful, and Mars and Jupiter
do not move in the skye for our sake, but are nothing


 

at all solicitous of the affairs of men, wherewith
they have naught in common, but accomplish their
courses independently, through a necessitude of revolving.

And others affirm that astrologie, although
not untruthful, is unprofitable, insomuch as divination will not alter that which draweth nigh by decree
of the fates.

To both these opinions I may answer that although
the stars do verily absolve their own course in the
skye, none the less as a parergy or incidental of their
motion each event among us cometh to pass. Or
will you have it that although if a horse run or
birds or humans move, pebbles are flung up and
strawes set astir by the wind of their motion, yet the
gyration of the stars bringeth naught else to pass?
And that whereas from a little fire an effluxion cometh
to us, although the fire burneth not for our sake at all
and is not a whit sollicitous that we be warmed, yet
from the stars we receive no effluxion whatever?
Furthermore, astrologie is indeed impotent to convert bad into good, or to effect mutation in any of the
effluents, yet is it profitable to those that employ
it, in so much as the good, when they know that it is
to come, delighteth them long beforehand, while the
bad they accept readily, for it cometh not upon them
unawares, but in vertue of contemplation and expectance is deemed easie and light. That is my opinion
in the matter of astrology.